                          EUROPEAN
                          COMMISSION




                                                 Strasbourg, 3.5.2022
                                                 SWD(2022) 131 final

                                                 PART 1/4




                   COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT

                          IMPACT ASSESSMENT REPORT

                              Accompanying the document

     PROPOSAL FOR A REGULATION OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF
                             THE COUNCIL

                          on the European Health Data Space

         {COM(2022) 197 final} - {SEC(2022) 196 final} - {SWD(2022) 130 final} -
                                 {SWD(2022) 132 final}




EN                                                                                 EN
    Table of contents

    1   INTRODUCTION 4
        1.1     Technological context ....................................................................................... 5
        1.2     Socio-economic context .................................................................................... 7
        1.3     Legal context ................................................................................................... 12
    2   PROBLEM DEFINITION ........................................................................................ 18
        2.1     Lessons learnt from the evaluation of Article 14 of the Cross Border
                Health Care Directive (CBHC) Directive ........................................................ 18
        2.2     What are the problems? ................................................................................... 19
        2.3     What are the problem drivers? ........................................................................ 25
        2.4     How will the problem evolve? ........................................................................ 27
    3   WHY SHOULD THE EU ACT? .............................................................................. 27
        3.1     Legal basis 27
        3.2     Subsidiarity and Proportionality ...................................................................... 29
    4   OBJECTIVES: WHAT IS TO BE ACHIEVED? ..................................................... 30
        4.1     General objective ............................................................................................. 30
        4.2     Specific objectives ........................................................................................... 30
        4.3     Objectives tree/intervention logic.................................................................... 31
    5   WHAT ARE THE AVAILABLE POLICY OPTIONS? .......................................... 31
        5.1     What is the baseline from which options are assessed? .................................. 35
        5.2     Description of the policy options .................................................................... 36
    6   WHAT ARE THE IMPACTS OF THE POLICY OPTIONS? ................................. 49
        6.1     Economic impact ............................................................................................. 49
        6.2     Single Market, competitiveness, innovation, SMEs and international
                aspects     60
        6.3     Impacts on fundamental rights ........................................................................ 61
        6.4     Social and environmental impact .................................................................... 63
    7   HOW DO THE OPTIONS COMPARE? .................................................................. 65
    8   PREFERRED OPTION ............................................................................................. 69
    9   HOW WILL ACTUAL IMPACTS BE MONITORED AND EVALUATED? ....... 71
    END-NOTES                     ..................................................................................................... 73




1
    Glossary

    Term or acronym   Meaning or definition
    AI                Artificial intelligence
    AIA               Artificial Intelligence Act
    App               Application
    CBHC              Cross-Border Healthcare Directive (2011/24/EU)
    CEF               Connecting Europe Facility
    DCC               Digital COVID-19 Certificate
    DGA               Data Governance Act
    DA                Data Act
    eIDAS             Electronic identification, authentication and trust services
    eHDSI,            Cross-border digital infrastructure for the exchange of health data,
    MyHealth@EU       also known as the eHealth Digital Service Infrastructure (previously
                      referred to as “eHDSI”)
    DARWIN            Data Analysis and Real-World Interrogation Network
    eHealth Network   Voluntary network established on the basis of Article 14 of
                      Directive 2011/24/EU with EU Member States representatives
                      collaborating on eHealth
    EEHRxF            European Electronic Health Record exchange format
    EHR               Electronic Health Record
    eID               Electronic Identification and Authentication
    epSOS             Smart Open Services for European Patients
    ECDC              European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control
    EMA               European Medicines Agency
    ERDF              European Regional Development Fund
    EU                European Union
    FTE               Fulltime equivalent
    GDP               Gross Domestic Product
    GDPR              General Data Protection Regulation
    GP                General Practitioner
    ICT               Information and Communication Technology
    MD                Medical Device



2
    MDR          Medical Device Regulation
    mHealth      Mobile communication device used in health and well-being
                 services covering various technological solutions, which support
                 self-management and measure vital signs such as heart rate, blood
                 glucose level, blood pressure, body temperature and brain activity.
    MWP          Multiannual Work Plan
    NCPeHs       National Contact Points for eHealth
    OECD         Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
    R&D          Research & Development
    RRF          Recovery and Resilience Facility
    RWE          Real World Evidence
    RWD          Real World Data
    Telehealth   Provision of healthcare services and medical information using
                 innovative technologies, especially ICT, in situations where the
                 health professional and patient (or two health professionals) are not
                 in the same location.
    WHO          World Health Organization




3
    1   1                   INTRODUCTION

    This impact assessment accompanies the legislative proposal on a European Health Data
    Space (EHDS). EHDS is one of the priorities of the current College in the area of healthi
    and will be an integral part of building a European Health Unionii. It will ensure
    coherence with a number of other EU legislative frameworks, including the General
    Data Protection Regulation, the Data Governance Act, the AI Act, cybersecurity regulatory
    framework, the eIDAS regulation, the pharmaceutical regulatory framework and the
    medical device regulationiii.

    The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the imperative of having timely access to health
    data for research, innovation, regulatory, policy-making and statistical purposes, and the
    European Council has recognised the urgency to make progress towards and to give
    priority to the EHDSiv. Such timely access would have helped, through efficient public
    health surveillance and monitoring, a more effective management of the pandemic, and
    ultimately contributing to save lives. In 2020, the Commission adapted urgently its
    Clinical Patient Management Systemv (CPMS) to allow Member States share the data of
    COVID patients when moving between healthcare providers and Member States during
    the peak of the pandemic, but this was only an emergency solution, showing the need for a
    structural approach at Member States and cross-country level. The call for structural
    approach was further strengthened through Council Conclusions by the ministers of health
    during the German Presidencyvi.

    In February 2019, the European Parliament adopted a resolution on the implementation of
    Directive 2011/24/EU on the application of patients’ rights in cross-border healthcare
    (hereinafter “CBHC Directive”)vii, where it stressed the need for action in the area of
    digital health data, personal records, ePrescriptions and telemedicine, while ensuring data
    protection.

    The 2020 European Strategy for Dataviii announced the Commission’s plans for European
    data spaces, including the EHDS. The initiative on an EHDS builds upon and
    complements the proposal for a Data Governance Actix and the proposal for a Data Actx,
    by providing specific measures for health. It also builds on the provisions of the GDPR for
    the area of health. The EHDS is a Commission priorityxi, as reiterated in the State of the
    Union of 2020xii and 2021xiii, and is included in the 2021 Commission Work Programme
    (CWP)xiv.

    Digital health has been on the agenda of the European Commission for a long timexv,
    building on the CBHC Directivexvi and eHealth Action Plan 2012-2020xvii. Prior to the
    COVID-19 health crisis, in the Communication on enabling digital transformation of
    health and care in the Digital Single Market (2018)xviii, the Commission announced its
    intention to act in three areas: citizens' secure access to and sharing of health data across
    borders; better data to advance research, disease prevention and personalised health and
    care; and digital tools for citizen empowerment and person-centred care. Through
    MyHealth@EUxix, in 2019, Member States started to provide patients the ability to share
    their data with healthcare providers (in the language of the healthcare professional) of their
    choice when traveling abroad. Also, progress was made on the interoperability of
    electronic health records (EHRs)xx. The COVID-19 crisis strongly anchored the work of
    the eHealth Network as the main pillar for the development of contact tracing and warning
    appsxxi and EU Digital COVID Certificatesxxii.

    At international level, the challenges and opportunities related to the growing digitalisation
    of data in the health area and to health data sharing have also been discussed. The Council

4
    of Europe issued in March 2019 a Recommendation on the protection of health-related
    dataxxiii, providing guidelines on the processing of health-related data in line with the
    Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. The
    Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) underlined in 2016xxiv
    the important and growing opportunities of health data re-use and World Health
    Organization (WHO) adopted a Global Strategy on digital health 2020-2025xxv. Moreover,
    WHO and OECD are looking into the state of play of digital health ecosystems of
    countries. The WHO has developed State of Digital Health report, which provides the
    snapshot throughout the world. The report presents data collected from the 22 countries
    across 6 regions that participate in the Global Digital Health Index (GDHI), analyses
    regional trends, and sets benchmarks to consider when charting future growth.xxvi. OECD
    regularly develops reports on the implementation, dissemination and continued relevance
    of the OECD Recommendation on Health Data Governancexxvii. Several third countries
    adopted specific legislation on data and interoperabilityxxviii. Cooperation with WHO,
    OECD, G7 continues, as well as bilateral cooperation with different third countries, such
    as the US.

    1.1   1.1               Technological context

    Data concerning health is defined by the GDPR as personal data related to the physical or
    mental health of a natural person, including the provision of health care services, which
    reveal information about his or her health status. The scope of health data covered by the
    EHDS includes not only processing of electronic personal data concerning health and
    social care, but also non-personal data, for example, as anonymised or aggregated data
    related to health and social carexxix which may fall outside the scope of the GDPR. It is
    important to distinguish between primary and secondary uses of health data to understand
    the challenges of the EHDS. In this context, primary and secondary uses should be
    understood as follows, unless indicated otherwise:

    a) Primary use, or use, of heath data is defined as the use of health data to support or
       provide direct individual healthcare delivery to the data subject, including for ensuring
       continuity of carexxx. Such data comprises data stored in electronic health records
       (including patient summaries, ePrescriptions, images, laboratory results, discharge
       reports), as well as other types of data (e.g. genetic data, data generated by medical
       devices or wellness applications). The eHealth Network, the existing voluntary
       cooperation network established under article 14 of the CBHC Directive, has worked
       over the past years on the cross-border exchange of health data for primary uses. Key
       information domains that have been or are being standardised (coded, made
       interoperability for data exchange etc.) include patient summaries,
       ePrescriptions/eDispensations, laboratory reports, medical images and reports and
       hospital discharge reports. While these documents are not the only documents
       constituting an electronic health record (EHR)xxxi, they are key datasets identified as a
       baseline for a European Electronic Health Record Exchange Format (EEHRxF)xxxii.
    b) Secondary use (or reuse) of health data is defined as the use of individual-level,
       personal or non-personal health data or aggregated datasets, particularly data generated
       during healthcare provision with the purpose of supporting research, innovation, policy
       making, regulatory activities and other uses, such as healthcare delivery to a patient,
       based on the data concerning other patients (e.g. personalised medicine). The scope of
       health data for reuse purposes is much wider than in the context of primary use. Such
       data could include electronic health records, other clinical documents, sickness claims,
       reimbursement data, diseases registries, but also relevant social data etc. Besides
       electronic health records and other digital health products and services, reusers may


5
       utilise sources such as disease-specific or subdomain-specific data registries (e.g.
       focused on brain research or communicable diseases, among many others) and
       networks of registries (such as EUROCAT or ENCR), health-related administrative
       data (e.g. reimbursement and claims data), as well as other specific datasets containing
       genetic and genomic data. The current landscape of health data reuse initiatives is
       characterised by disease-specific or subdomain-specific initiatives and
       infrastructuresxxxiii.

    Digital health refers to the use of digital technologies by people and healthcare systems for
    health. It covers a wide range of services and products, including medical devicesxxxiv,
    such as those used for remote care delivery, health data and information management,
    patient management (including therapeutic decision-making) and telemonitoring and
    diagnosisxxxv. The rollout of digital technologiesxxxvi is rapidly changing the way in which
    health and care services are provided, and the scope of health data processing, which has
    traditionally been limited to electronic health records systems and other IT systems
    managed by healthcare systems, is becoming more decentralised and more granular, as
    online and portable electronic devices become more popular. These technologies
    increasingly rely on health data generation, access, processing and transmission by patients
    themselves and their reach extends beyond traditional health systems. This decentralisation
    has also widened the data domains that are relevant for providing health carexxxvii,
    including, for example, data generated from digital health products such as wearables or
    mobile health applicationsxxxviii (which can also be medical devices), as well as wellness
    mobile applicationsxxxix and patient recorded outcomes.

    An overview of user perspectives is available in Figure 1 of Annex 4 on graphical
    representation of different aspects in the impact assessment.

    As defined by the GDPRxl, personal health data is highly sensitive for the repercussions its
    processing potentially has on the health and wellbeing of individuals, and its processing is
    therefore characterised by specific standards and protocols for interoperability and
    cybersecurity. The categories of relevant health data are widening and becoming more
    diverse and decentralised and are collected in different formats and repositoriesxli. While
    GDPR foresee the right to access and portability of data, its practical implementation is
    hampered by different structures of data, different coding and different standards for
    sharing data between data sources. Technologically, the decentralisation has brought new
    challenges for interoperability beyond the interoperability between electronic health
    records, particularly regarding the interoperability among digital devices and digital health
    applications. Due to a lack of interoperability, in many cases, healthcare professionals
    cannot access the complete medical history of the patient and cannot make optimal
    medical decisions for the treatment and diagnosis of their patients, which adds
    considerable costs for both health systems and patients. Researchers and innovators cannot
    have access to sufficiently large amounts of health data that is necessary for breakthroughs
    in the medical field. Likewise, policy-makers and regulators lack the relevant health data
    in order to take efficient decisions and ensure the right surveillance of health issues. The
    picture below describes the challenges in terms of interoperability. According to eHealth
    Network’s Refined eHealth European Interoperability Frameworkxlii, for interoperability to
    be implemented, one should ensure legal interoperability (same rules), organisational
    (similar policy and care processes), semantic (similar way of codong the information that
    feeds into the system) and technical interoperability (for applications and IT
    infrastructure)xliii. For more details on the interoperability challenges, including the
    interoperability framework and the state of play in Member States, see Annex 10.



6
     Figure 2: Interoperability of the health ecosystem (source: MedTech Europe, Cocir, Interoperability
          standards in digital health. A white paper from the medical technology industry, 06/10/2021,
                                interoperability-white-paper-cover (cocir.org)).


    1.2   1.2                 Socio-economic context

    Digital health products and the use and reuse of health data can enable models of care
    better suited to people and patients’ needs and preferences, by preventing the onset of
    disease or earlier treatment. The increased use of digital health solutions during the
    COVID-19 pandemic allowed healthcare systems to expand their support of patients from
    various socioeconomic backgrounds who would otherwise not seek or be able to access
    care during this crisis. The use and reuse of health data influences the quality and
    efficiency of health services received by individuals in many ways. The availability of
    health data to healthcare professionals is key for ensuring continuity of care and avoiding
    duplications and errors, and to policy-makers for proper decision-making, for example,
    regarding the assessment of new health technologies for pricing and reimbursement. The
    availability of health data to patients is also fundamental for transparency and better
    disease management. The use and reuse of health data can inform better clinical decisions,
    contribute to automation in health and accelerate R&D processes, helping close the current
    productivity gap both in the provision of healthcare and in the research and development
    of medical breakthroughs.

    In order to ensure that the patients can control their health data, for the primary use of
    health data, one can distinguish three main product markets that can be impacted by the
    European Health Data Space initiative, as they entail use of data (especially access and
    portability): electronic health records, medical devices and wellness apps.
    Telemedicine is also another market (although it often contains a combination of medical
    devices, electronic health records and communication tools). The market of healthcare
    providers is also impacted by the proposal, as they need to ensure that data can be
    shared/made accessible and that the electronic health records, medical devices and other
    systems are interoperable.



7
    The health services sector, representing approximately 10% of the EU’s GDPxliv and
    including both public and private providers, is a fundamental ecosystem both for the
    wellbeing of Europeans and the economy of the EU. Europe’s healthcare systems are
    under pressurexlv as health costs increase at a faster rate than GDP due to, among others,
    structural issues such as ageing population and high development costs of new medicines
    and treatmentsxlvi. The COVID-19 pandemic exacerbated this issue. The sharing and
    reusing of health data, particularly combined with automation and digitalisation, would
    contribute to increased efficiencies. When all relevant health information is available at the
    point of care, tests no longer need to be duplicated, the administrative burden on healthcare
    professionals will be lowered when entering or copying health data between systems and
    medical errors can be reduced. Studies have estimates that up to 20% of spending in health
    could be wasteful and that, therefore, this waste could be reduced without hampering the
    performance of healthcare systemsxlvii. Digitalisation and interoperability can contribute to
    reducing this waste by allowing the data to be shared between healthcare providers thus
    leading to better, more targeted diagnosis, avoiding duplications and additional
    unnecessary costs. Overall, studies have shown that the increased use of health data and
    increased interoperability could generate potential savings valued at EUR 4.6 billion per
    year for health services and 4.3 billion per year for patients xlviii. The most recent estimates
    by the OECD suggest that the combined economic benefits of putting data and digital
    technology to work in the health sector could amount to 8% of the total health expenditure
    of all OECD countriesxlix. While the investments in digital health contribute to the
    competitivennes of Member States’ economies and their future growth, allowing the cost
    savings and increased efficiency of health systems, detailed estimations are not yet
    systematically available.

    With regards to electronic health records (EHRs), the introduction of electronic health
    records for medical coding and billing has eased the process as data entering into
    computerized systems is more convenient than paper-based methods. The size of the
    global market in 2020 was estimated at USD 26.9 billion and is expected to grow to US 35
    billion by 2028l. While the market is competitive, some big players, such as Cerner
    Corporation, Allscripts Healthcare LLC, EPIC Corporation are among the major brands in
    the market, but smaller players are also active. Many providers tend to provide proprietary
    solutions, which lead to lock-in effects, although governmental initiatives (e.g. 21 Century
    Cures Act of the US government) can lead to increased interoperability and data
    unblocking. For instance, in August 2020, Cerner Corp. collaborated with Amazon to
    integrate its EHR solutions with the latter’s wearables, such as Amazon Halo. This would
    provide greater interoperability to its customers and strengthen its service portfolioli.
    During the COVID-19 crisis, Electronic Health Records (EHR) vendors and organizations
    have started to help curbing the pandemic by making telehealth a mainstream alternative,
    enhancing data access through EHRs, and collaborating to develop Covid-19 dashboards
    in detail. In terms of regional distribution, North America is expected to dominate the
    global EHR market owing to rising support for the adoption of health information
    technology by providers and payers, big giants in the market focusing on improving
    patients’ clinical outcomes, coupled with increasing government initiatives and
    programmes for population health management. Asia Pacific seems the fastest growing
    region in this field, especially thanks to governmental initiatives in China. Europe
    (including Russia) is estimated to have a share of around 27% of the global marketlii,
    which would mean by extrapolation around EUR 3.85 billion. However, this seems to be a
    conservative estimate, as shown by the estimates of Member States. Based on information
    received from experts in Member States, the cost of setting up nationally electronic health
    record systems ranges between few hundred million euros EUR 1.4 billion for mid-sized
    and large EU countries, depending on the service coverage. Based on Member States


8
    declarations, studiesliii and extrapolations, the value of the EHR market can go up to EUR
    16 billion, out of which EUR 3-9 billion need to be set up or further developed. Under the
    Recovery and Resilience Facility, Member States applied for around EUR 12 billion
    funding for digital health (out of a total of EUR 720 billion) including for investments in
    electronic health records. In terms of number of EHR products, Finland has registered
    around 400 electronic health record systems, including 80 connected to the national system
    (Kanta) and other digital health products processing electronic health data in its current
    database of certified products. By extrapolation (considering all EU Member States and
    that some products can overlap between different countries), one could expect around
    4,000-5,000 EHR systems on the EU market, as some producers will provide services in
    several countries.

    During the pandemic, faced with the unprecedented need for remote access to care in the
    context of the imposed social distancing restrictions, the use of digital health, including
    telemedicine has increased significantly (e.g. reflected in the use of teleconsultationsliv),
    thus guaranteeing continuity of care for a large part of the populationlv. According to
    Eurostat, 2% of the population report unmet needs for medical examination and care due
    to the healthcare service being too expensive or too far to travel. Digital health products
    and services, including telehealth, are increasingly becoming an intrinsic part of the
    delivery of care, allowing to reduce some of the inequalities in relation to access and
    affordability of healthcare. The integration of these digital products and services can
    positively contribute to improving the cost-effectiveness of healthcare systems, e.g.
    telemedicine is reported to be cost-effective in 73.3% of the cases covered by the
    literaturelvi. A 2018 market study on telemedicinelvii considered that its market potential
    was strong and expected to grow in the EU at a compound annual growth rate of 14% in
    the coming years. Telemedicine is also expected to improve the efficiency of the
    healthcare systems, including by supporting triage. In fact, OECD estimated that 12% to
    56% of emergency department visits are inappropriatelviii. The COVID crisis has boosted
    strongly the telemedicine market. In the long run, it is expected that the global market is
    projected to grow from USD 41.63 in 2019, USD 79.79 billion in 2020 to USD 396.76
    billion by 2027lix, with North America in the lead, followed by Europe. At the same time,
    further roll-out of telemedicine requires more mature and interoperable electronic health
    records and medical devices.

    The global digital health market, which comprises various software and hardware
    solutions (which includes medical devices, but not necessarily) used in the processing of
    health data, has seen a steady increase in terms of size, and was expected to almost double
    in size, from EUR 16 billion in 2015 to EUR 31 billion in 2020lx. For example, industry
    association COCIR estimates that the size of the European market for medical imaging IT
    technologies is worth EUR 500 million. The European digital health sector is a very
    important supplier of products and services for healthcare, but before the pandemic it
    clearly lagged behind the US both in terms of revenue and number of users per capita lxi. A
    consultancy considered that by using mHealth solutions to their potential, healthcare
    systems in the EU can save 99 billion EUR in total annual healthcare spend in 2017 after
    the cost of extra workforce to support mHealthlxii. According to Eurostatlxiii, in 2019,
    pharmaceutical goods and other medical non-durable goods made up approximately 14%
    of total health expenditure in the EUlxiv, or almost EUR 195 billion, while therapeutic
    appliances and other medical durable goods made up 4%, or around EUR 60 billion.
    According to the yearly analysis of an industry associationlxv, the medical devices industry
    employs 760,000 workers, consists of 33,000 companies (of which 95% are SMEs), and
    represents almost 8% of healthcare expenditure. The European medical devices market,
    with a size of EUR 140 billion and growing steadily since 2017, is the second largest


9
     market after the US and represents 28% of the world market for medical devices. This
     sector contributed to the EU’s economy with a EUR 8.7 billion trade surplus in 2020.

     Digital products that are medical devices are another sector impacted by EHDS in several
     ways: re-use of data is essential to develop some devices, especially those entailing AI. At
     the same time, these devices produce data that ideally should be ported to electronic health
     records if the two are interoperable and be consulted by the patient and the healthcare
     provider. An industry association listed around 500 000 products in the area of medical
     devices (including all types of devices, from digital to masks and PPE), but the exact
     numbers of devices that process patients’ data are difficult to identify. Devices processing
     patients’ data could include: personal (connected) health devices (including imaging and
     other diagnostic/monitoring devices in clinical settings, digital and robotic surgery
     equipment, telehealth and remote care/monitoring systems, glucose meters and insulin
     pens, pulse oximeters, blood pressure cuffs, thermometers, medical grade weight scales,
     etc.), cardiac implanted electronic devices, health apps ranging from personal
     monitoring/coaching to advanced clinical decision support software etc. The central
     database Eudamedlxvi is being set up and only a limited number of medical devices have
     been included (59 with software and around 1000 using electricity). A search in medical
     devices database of Italy revealed around 160 medical devices that process information
     such as images which, by extrapolation to the whole EU (taing into account the overlap on
     different markets and increased number of products), can lead to around 5,000-20,000
     medical devices processing patients’ data.

     Other m-health products that may produce relevant health data are wellness applications
     (which do not fit within the definition of medical devicelxvii). The size of the market is
     much bigger than for medical devices. A 2019 study published by the Dutch National
     Institute for Public Health and the Environment analysed the market of mobile health
     applications in the Netherlands and found that 21% of sampled applications were a
     medical device (i.e. a mobile health application according to the definition above), while
     the rest 79% were not (i.e. a wellness mobile application)lxviii. With regards to the state of
     the market, over 71,000 health and fitness apps were launched globally in 2020 (24,000 in
     the Apple App Store and 47,000 in the Google Play Store)lxix. According to the IQVIA
     Institutelxx the volume of health-related mobile applications would have surpassed 350,000
     globally in 2021. According to industry analystslxxi, sales in health and fitness apps in
     Europe accounted for 30% of global spending in the category, up from a 27% share in
     2019. Therefore, there could be approximately 100,000 mobile wellness applications in the
     European market. The COVID-19 crisis boosted the use of such apps, with Europe as a
     global lead. European spending in health and fitness category mobile applicationss jumped
     by 70% year-over-year in 2020 to an estimated USD 544 million as consumers looked to
     keep fit and stay mindful during the COVID-19 pandemic and regional
     lockdowns. Downloads of Health & Fitness category apps saw a significant surge in
     Europe during 2020, rising by approximately 46% year-over-year in 2020 to 829
     millionlxxii.




10
             Figure 3. The patient monitoring continuum (Source: Medtecheurope, Cocir, 2021).

     For the secondary use of health data, the main sectors impacted are research and
     innovation (including on pharma, medical devices, AI), policy making and regulatory
     aspects, as well as the data market.

     The yearly economic value of health data reuse, which can very notably benefit the
     development and placing in the market of new pharmaceutical productslxxiii, medical
     devices and other digital health products (e.g. those based on artificial intelligence), is
     estimated at around EUR 25-30 billion at present, expected to increase to around 50 billion
     in 10 yearslxxiv.

     According to a recent retrospective analysislxxv on the use of real-world evidence (RWE)
     to support marketing authorisation applications to the EMA for new pharmaceutical
     products and extensions of indications, 40% of initial marketing authorisation applications
     and 18% of applications for extension of indication for products currently on the market
     contained RWE (obtained from the re-use of data from electronic health records, registries
     etc). Another recent analysislxxvi on the use of RWE during the pre-authorisation phase
     concluded that dearly all European Public Assessment Reports submitted in 2018-2019
     relied on RWE for the discovery (98.2%) and life-cycle management (100.0%)lxxvii.
     However, the collection and management of RWE remains costly, particularly when it
     requires processing of personal health data originating from several national jurisdictions
     and when such data is being collected by obtaining the explicit consent of each data
     subject. Reducing the costs of accessing the data (fee to data access body as opposed to
     contacting data subjects and getting the consent) can stimulate new research, innovation
     and can facilitate the decision making of health authorities and regulators. For more details
     concerning the differences in costs, see Annex 5 on methodological approach.

     According to the current evaluation of data markets for the countries that developed
     mapping and quality evaluation of different data sources, Finland has listed in its data
     catalogue around 450 data sources/datasets and France, 12. Therefore, extrapolating and
     considering that not all the countries will have from the beginning the same level of
     maturity and mapping and evaluation of data sources/datasets, one could have at the level
     of EU, at the end of 10 years between 3500-5000 data sources mapped and benefiting from
     a quality label (with some countries having more, others less).

     Overall, Member States and stakeholders are supportive to the objectives of the EHDS
     initiative, as gathered in the public consultation and other stakeholder consultations. The
     most important objectives that respondents said a European framework on the access and
     exchange of personal health data should aim included: supporting and accelerating
     research in health (89%); promoting citizens’ control over their own health data, including

11
     access to health data and transmission of their health data in electronic format (88%); and
     facilitating the delivery of healthcare for citizens across borders (83%) (see Annex 2).

     1.3     1.3                Legal context

     1.3.1 1.3.1           Horizontal framework

     As shown in Annex 6, the EHDS builds upon legislation such as GDPR, Data Governance
     Act, Data Act and the Cross-border Healthcare Directive, while ensuring compliance with
     regulatory frameworks in the areas of sybersecurity, pharma and cross-border health
     threats.

     Considering that a substantive amount of data to be accessed in EHDS are personal health
     data relating to individuals in the EU, the instrument must be designed in full compliance
     with the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)lxxviii, but also with EU Data
     Protection Regulationlxxix (EUDPR). The instrument should also take account of the
     EU’s international trade commitments.
     The use of data for health and the re-use of health-related data build on the possibilities for
     processing health data based on EU law, offered by the article 9 of GDPRlxxx for
     processing special categories of data, including health or genetic data, whereby processing
     is necessary for:
          healthcare provision (the purposes of preventive or occupational medicine, for the
           assessment of the working capacity of the employee, medical diagnosis, the provision
           of health or social care or treatment or the management of health or social care systems
           and services and subject to professional secrecy (Article 9(2)(h));
          for reasons of public interest in the area of public health, such as protecting against
           serious cross-border threats to health or ensuring high standards of quality and safety
           of health care and of medicinal products or medical devices (Article 9(2)(i));
          scientific or historical research, statistical purposes or archiving in the public interest
           (Article 9(2)(j)).
     With regards to processing of data for healthcare (primary use of health data), EHDS
     is intended to reinforce the control of patients over their health data by establishing clear
     rules on how the rights of data subjects under chapter III of the GDPR (right to access,
     portability, information, rectification, erasure, restriction of processing, right to object,
     with a focus on right to access and port the data) can be implemented in practice. EHDS
     would task the national digital health authorities with establishing a national framework
     supporting the implementation of these rights. Such a framework could entail establishing
     of national patient portal, as well as implementation of requirements that could stengthen
     the interoperability and allow the data to “flow” between healthcare providers (by
     certification, using such standards in procurements etc.).

     In the context of EHDS, the notion of “control” on the part of the individuals concerning
     the rights remains the same as in Chapter III and IV of GDPR. More specifically, the
     EHDS aims at further strengthening the right to access and portability of the data subjects
     to their health data so that they can provide it to the healthcare professionals of their choice
     rapidly and in an easy, transparent common format. The need to reinforce the right to
     access in the field of the healthcare services derives from objective difficulties and
     obstacles, since, for instance, the data may not be available immediately or in an electronic
     format (for more details, see Annex 12 on the evaluation of the Cross-Border Healthcare
     Directive). Moreover, this right is difficult to implement in practice in an electronic format
     if no patient portal exists and if data is stored in electronic health records of healthcare

12
     providers which are not readily accessible to patients. A studylxxxi has shown that, while 26
     EU/EEA countries generally provide their citizens with access to EHR data by law, 12
     countries indicate that their citizens are not entitled to choose which healthcare
     professional or other party can access their EHR. Most countries specify conditions for
     alteration and archiving of electronic health data, but only around one third allow patients
     to correct data entered intheir EHR by themselves.

     Furthermore, one of the major purposes of the EHDS is to facilitate the transfer of health
     data, upon request of the data subjects, between the healthcare or social providers of their
     choice. Article 20 GDPR provides the right to portability for data subjects. However, its
     fragmented implementation across Member States has shown some serious limitations
     concerning healthcare, as Article 20 GDPR excludes: a) health data that has not been
     provided by the data subject or observed (e.g. medical reports etc.), b) data that had been
     processed based on another legal basis other than consent or contract (which in practice
     excludessome categories of public entities the majority of which processes personal data
     on the legal basis of public interest). Consequently, on a practical level, patients may not
     exercise the right to portability of their health data when for example consulting a new
     doctor (patients need to ask for the data, bring it often in paper format, and the data may be
     incomplete) since it could be outside the scope of Article 20 of the GDPR. Moreover, the
     portability right cannot be implemented technically if there is no interoperability between
     different healthcare providers and with an electronic health record. If the standards and
     specifications used for different solutions are proprietary and cannot “talk” to each other, if
     data are kept in silos then even if the various healthcare providers are willing to fulfil the
     data subject’s demand in relation to their personal health data it will be challenging to do
     so in practice. Therefore, the EHDS proposal will also support the technical aspects that
     are necessary to operationalise some of the GDPR rights, as for instance, the electronic
     right of access and portability cannot be ensured without the necessary technical elements
     standards and specifications necessary to ensure interoperability between different data
     sources, authentication of individuals or setting up the national infrastructure for electronic
     health records.

     Whilst consent (Article 6(1)(a) and 9(2)(a) of GDRPR) is one of the main legal bases for
     health data processing under GDPR, the GDPR also allows the processing of health data
     under other valid legal basis- ie provision of health or social care, public health, scientific
     purpose based on Union or national law. Thus, data can be processed as per Articles
     9(2)(h), (i) (j)lxxxii of the GDPR, which do not require explicit consent, provided that
     suitable and specific measures are put in place to safeguard the rights and freedoms of data
     subjects. Some Member States already use these possibilities under their national law (see
     Table 1. in section 2.2.).

     For secondary use of health data, EHDS would build upon these possibilities offered by
     GDPR for a specific EU law with particular safeguards. It will develop a European
     framework, inspired from the actions taken by several Member States that adopted similar
     national legislation for the secondary use of health data. EHDS, similarly to these national
     laws, would specify the purposes for which data can be used, as well as limitationslxxxiii in
     full compliance with the provisions and requirements of the GDPR.
     Similarly to national framework built upon GDPR, EHDS would ensure that data is
     processed in a legal, ethical and secure way by setting up a data access body/data permit
     authoritylxxxiv deciding on every request to access to data, alone or in cooperation with
     other entitieslxxxv. EHDS would provide access to a large array of health data (electronic
     health records, claims, genetic data etc.), but the technical implementation of the



13
     cooperation between the data access bodies and the data holders would be left to the
     national level.
     The request for data access should provide information about the purpose of processing,
     ethical evaluation, data protection aspects etclxxxvi which would allow the data access body
     to analyse and determine whether the request complies with the relevant data protection
     principles. In line with data minimisation principles under GDPR, data, by default, may be
     provided in an anonymised/aggregated way or in a pseudonymised way. In order to ensure
     security of the data, this can be processed in a virtual secure processing environment
     where the researcher has the necessary IT tools for data processing, but only the
     aggregated results can be downloaded. EHDS may foresee that data users can process data
     based on Union law and applicable data protection principles, provided that they comply
     with the security standards and data is processed in a secure environment. The proposed
     system will promote the processing of personal health data while maintaining strong legal
     and technical security safeguards to the rights of the data subjects as required by GDPR.
     During the discussions with several Member States which have already set up such data
     access bodies, it appeared that they have encountered a high demand for such service and
     are currently facing long delays to satisfy all the requests.




       Figure 4. Big picture of the secondary use of health and social data (source: Finland’s Ministry of
                                                     Health).

     The EHDS would build upon the horizontal framework on data access and reuse, including
     the proposal for a Data Governance Act (DGA)lxxxvii adopted on 25 November 2020
     (political agreement in November 2021) and the proposal for a Data Actlxxxviii, to
     complement it and provide more specific rules for the health sector. These specific rules
     would cover standards and specifications for providers of data intermediation services in
     the health sector, minimum technical requirements for the portability of health data,
     criteria for security of data for bodies dealing with data altruism).

     When providing a framework for data reuse in health, EHDS will build upon the DGA.
     As a horizontal framework, the DGA cannot address the specificities of sensitive data,
     such as health or genetic data. The DGA alone does not provide an adequate solution to
     the current uncoordinated patchwork of national laws arising from the fragmented


14
     implementation of the GDPR in the health domain. DGA does not provide a legal base for
     re-use of sensitive catagories of data, such as health data, whose processing is in principle
     prohibited, save exceptions listed in article 9(2) of GDPR (including an EU law providing
     the adequate safeguards). Furthermore, DGA does not impose any obligation to create
     “data access bodies” which could be empowered to grant access to health data. However,
     the technical framework set up under DGA (e.g. secure environments) could be used by
     the data access bodies under EHDS. As concerns data sharing intermediaries and data
     altruism organisations, the DGA provides for rules which apply regardless of the
     concerned sectors. However, specific rules are needed for example on security in order to
     take into account the specificities of personal health data, already outlined in section 1.1.
     In addition, the DGA regulates data sharing intermediaries mainly from a competition
     point of view (neutrality of marketplaces for data) and does not lay down rules mitigating
     specific risks of primary and secondary use of health data, including on technical formats
     for interoperability. For these reasons, with the EHDS, it should be possible to consolidate
     the requirements and technical framework needed to achieve a functioning system in the
     field of primary and secondary use of health data complementing the DGA rules with more
     detailed or more practical rules considering the specific nature of health data.

     With regards to Data Act proposal, EHDS would build on provisions related to portability
     and access of data linked to devices (medical devices and wellness apps). The Data Act
     may set a general portability rule for data from such devices, irrespective whether health
     related or not. For health data, EHDS would extend to electronic health records and
     medical devices feeding data to EHRs. It would build upon the Data Act and establish the
     standards and specifications for portability and interoperability, thus making the portability
     and access technically and practically possible.

     With regard to the use of data from entreprises (especially commercial data) by public
     sector bodies in exceptional circumstances, EHDS would build upon Data Act, by
     providing a secure framework for processing health data through data access bodies. At the
     same time, unlike the DA, EHDS would ensure that data held by both public and private
     healthcare providers can be made available through EHDS.

     The aim of establishing the EHDS is also to aid all the parties involved in Artificial
     Intelligence (AI) in healthcare to carry out their tasks and fulfil their legal obligations
     under the proposal for a regulation laying down harmonised rules on artificial
     intelligence (Artificial Intelligence Act (AIA))lxxxix. The AI Act provides the framework
     and rules that providers of some type of AI algorithms need to comply with. EHDS can
     support the providers with the provision of quality health data necessary for these
     algorithms to perform as intended and be compliant with AIA. Health data play a key role
     in the training, validation, testing and post-market monitoring of AI in healthcare. The
     training and use of AI algorithms in health needs to take place in a way that is ethical;
     discrimination and other adverse effects need to be avoided. The aim of establishing the
     EHDS is to also aid providers and users of AI as well as notified bodies and market
     surveillance authorities to carry out their tasks and effectively and efficiently fulfil their
     legal obligations under the AIA. The possibility to access diverse and a large amount of
     organized data within the EHDS infrastructure that provide transparency and information
     concerning the characteristics of these data would lead to the speedy development, upscale
     and uptake of trustworthy AI in healthcare. For instance, health data within the EHDS
     could share common standards and/or follow common rules and guidelines on issues like
     annotation, labelling, prevention of bias and avoidance of errors. Additionally, information
     might be provided on the characteristics of data within the EHDS infrastructure that would
     enable the developer of AI systems to use appropriate data to train, test and validate


15
     algorithms that reflect the geographical, behavioural or functional setting within which the
     AI system is intended to be used. In this regard, Health Data Access Bodies and/or
     national bodies might be involved to develop and oversee common rules.

     The Directive on Security of Network and Information Systems (the NIS Directive,
     2016/1148/EU) set the first EU-wide rules on cybersecurity. The objective of the
     Directive is to achieve a high common level of security of network and information
     systems within the EU and covers operators working in the healthcare sector. By
     promoting the use of compulsory common security standards and of the integration of
     electronic identification (eID) for healthcare professionals and patients, the EHDS
     initiative reinforce and complement the principles and security measures set out in the
     aforementioned cybersecurity regulatory framework. It is designed to enhance the security
     and trust in the technical framework designed to facilitate the exchange of health data both
     for primary and secondary use. The initiative would build on the new framework for eID,
     including the Digital eID Wallet. This would allow the online identification of patients. A
     pilot project has been launched in 2021 and aims to support the access of patients to their
     data, including in the context of MyHealth@EU.

     The NIS Directive is being revised (NIS2 proposalxc) and is currently undergoing
     negotiations with the co-legislators. It aims to raise the EU common level of ambition of
     the cybersecurity regulatory framework, through a wider scope, clearer rules and stronger
     supervision tools. The Commission proposal addresses these issues across three pillars: (1)
     Member State capabilities; (2) risk management; (3) cooperation and information
     exchange. Operators in the healthcare system remain under the scope. A proposal for a
     Cyber Resilience Act is also planned for adoption by the Commission in 2022, with the
     aim to set out horizontal cybersecurity requirements for digital products and ancillary
     services. The envisaged set of essential cybersecurity requirements to be laid down by the
     Cyber Resilience Act will be applied to all sectors and categories of digital products whose
     producers and vendors shall comply with, before placing the products on the market or, as
     applicable, when putting them into service and also through the entire product lifecycle.
     These requirements will be of general nature and technology neutral.

     Although the horizontal initiatives affect some common issues that may be encountered in
     the health data sector, they often lack dedicated provisions addressing the specificities and
     peculiarities of the health data sector. The common provisions like those encountered in,
     for instance, the proposal for a Data Act, may in practice negatively impact on different
     sectors if no sectoral exclusions are allowed (e.g. an obligation for compensation in case of
     B2B data sharing could hamper the interoperability of medical devices and healthcare
     providers). If these proposals have provisions on health data, such as the GDPR, they do
     not always provide the necessary elements to translate these provisions into the expected
     operational practices or may only respond to some of the sectoral needs. For instance,
     access to health data is not immediate; the portability article excludes inferred data, such
     as tests or diagnoses, of data from some public healthcare providers; moreover, the
     portability right may be limited by the lack of interoperability between healthcare
     providers or cross-border.

     1.3.2 1.3.2        Sectoral legislation

     The current relevant applicable EU legal framework for the cross-border exchange of
     health data is laid down in the CBHC Directive. The EU supports and facilitates
     voluntary cooperation and the exchange of information among Member States working
     within a voluntary network connecting national authorities responsible for eHealth in the
     Member States (the ‘eHealth Network’), as well as other tasks related to patients access to

16
     data, telemedicine, interoperability of prescriptions. The EHDS proposal will repeal the
     relevant provisions of the CBHC Directive and replace the current article 14 (limited to
     governance) with completely new set of binding rules on data use and re-use. An
     evaluation of the key provisions related to digital health in the CBHC Directive (Article 14
     and the articles related to patients’ access to their data, telemedicine, interoperability of
     prescriptions), as well as the national implementation of the European Electronic Health
     Record Exchange Format and the role of eHealth Network in this respect has been carried.

     The current voluntary system to support patients’ access and sharing of health data, to deal
     with fragmentation and low interoperability of digital health at national and cross-border
     level has limited effectivenessxci. The eHealth Network, with its voluntary structure and a
     decision making based on guidelines, has had a limited impact on supporting individual’s
     access to and control over their health data (including through the uptake and
     interoperability of digital health across the EU). The eHealth Network was very ineffective
     in supporting the re-use of health data for research and policy-making (also because its
     members often do not have tasks in this area at national level). On the other hand, during
     the COVID-19 crisis, the eHealth Network set up in a very short time two EU-wide
     interoperable infrastructures (the European Federation Gateway Services and the gateway
     for the EU Digital COVID Certificates), also supported in one case by a strong and
     harmonising legal basis (a regulation for EU Digital COVID Certificatesxcii).

     The medical device regulatory framework is composed of the medical devices
     Regulation (2017/745/EU) and the in vitro diagnostic medical devices Regulation
     (2017/746/EU). These regulations include provisions related to the assessment and
     marketing authorisation of medical devices in the Union. While the CE marking of
     medical devices comprise some elements related to security and interoperability of the
     device and its platform, it does not entail elements related to the interoperability of
     medical devices with electronic health records, which is a fundamental aspect for data
     portability. EHDS aims to tackle this, including by specific mandatory standards and
     specifications and a certification process for those devices that process data which is core
     for electronic health records.

     Pharmaceutical regulatory framework The EU legal framework for human medicines
     sets standards to ensure a high level of public health protection and the quality, safety and
     efficacy of authorised medicines. Additionally, EU legislation provides for common rules
     for the conduct of clinical trials in the EUxciii. Various rules have also been adopted to
     address the particularities of certain types of medicinal products and promote research in
     specific areasxciv. The EHDS initiative complements the aims and scopes of the
     aforementioned Regulations and Directives by providing access to a wide range of health
     data that could be useful for regulatory purposes and enhance and streamline the collection
     of the necessary health data required to assess and supervise the introduction and
     surveillance of pharmaceutical products and devices in the Union. The set-up of the EHDS
     would be an integral part of building a European Health Union, a process launched by
     the adoption of a first set of proposals to reinforce preparedness and response during health
     crisisxcv, which pave the way for the participation of the European Medicines Agency
     (EMA) and the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) in the future
     EHDS infrastructure, along with research institutes, public health bodies, and Health Data
     Access Bodies in the Member States. The EHDS infrastructure for secondary use of health
     data could also support the activities of European Health Emergency preparedness and
     Response Authority (HERA)xcvi and “Europe’s Beating Cancer Plan”xcvii and Horizon
     Europe EU Mission on Cancer. xcviii.



17
     The EHDS proposal will ensure coherence with other sectoral regulatory frameworks. It
     will address the peculiarities and specific legal and securities issues related to the
     processing of health data both for primary and secondary use.

     2                    2                                    PROBLEM DEFINITION

     Figure 6 shows the link between the problems identified, their drivers and consequences.
     The evaluation of the existing framework under the CBHC Directive was used as a starting
     point for the identification of the problems and drivers.
           Consequences




                                 Increased medical errors,
                                                                     Limited competitiveness         Vendor/            Individuals cannot fully         Policy-makers and regulators
                              unnecessary repeated tests, and
                                                                    of European providers of        healthcare       benefit from innovative health     cannot make optimal decisions,
                              overall substantial inefficiencies
                                                                    digital health services and   provider lock-     products and services based on     particularly hampering effective
                                 and costs for patients and
                                                                             products              in situations        health data use and reuse              crisis management
                                     healthcare systems

                                Cumbersome individuals control            Providers of digital health services and     Individuals have access to        Policy-makers and regulators
         Problems




                              over their own health data limits their      products face barriers and additional        limited innovative health       cannot easily access health data
                              access to health services, including in       costs when entering the markets of       products and services based on      for their tasks and to react to
                                     the cross-border setting                      other Member States                  health data use and reuse                 health crises


                                 Fragmented and limited tools for                Limited legal and technical
                                                                                                                          Fragmented and divergent legal and administrative rules,
         Drivers




                              citizens control over their own health         interoperability and cybersecurity
                                                                                                                       frameworks, processes, standards and infrastructures for health
                                data in electronic format and their         (fragmented landscape of standards,
                                                                                                                                                data re-use
                                        digital transmission               formats, protocols and requirements)



                                                                                    Figure 5. Problem tree.


     2.1                      2.1            Lessons learnt from the evaluation of Article 14 of the Cross
                              Border Health Care Directive (CBHC) Directive

     The evalution of the Cross Border Healthcare Directive’s provisions related to eHealth
     concluded that due to the voluntary nature of the eHealth Network actions its effectiveness
     and efficiency has been rather limited.

     Progress is slow on the use of health data for primary purpose in the context of cross-
     border healthcare with the MyHealth@EU platform being implemented only in 9 Member
     States and currently supporting two services only (ePrescriptions and Patient Summaries).
     The low and slow uptake is partly related to the fact that the Directive, whilst establishing
     the right of patients to receive a written record of the treatment carried out, does not
     require this medical record to be provided in electronic form. Patients’ access to their
     health data remains burdensome, citizens’ control over their own personal health data and
     the use of data for medical diagnosis and treatment is limited. While the eHealth Network
     recommended Member States to use the standards and specifications from Electronic
     Health Record Exchange Format in procurements, in order to build interoperability, their
     real uptake was limited, resulting in fragmented landscape and uneven access to and
     portability of health data.

     Most Member States are expected to implement the MyHealth@EU platform by 2025.
     Only when more Member States will implement the MyHealth@EU platform and the
     developed tools, their use, development, and maintenance will become more efficient
     across the EU. However, advancements in eHealth in recent years call for a more
     coordinated action at EU level.

     Nevertheless, following the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic in Europe, the eHealth
     Network proved to be very effective and efficient in times of public health crisis and
     political convergence following the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak.



18
     On secondary use of health data, the eHealth Network activities were very limited and not
     very effective. The few non-binding documents on big data were not followed up by
     further specific actions and their implementation in practice remains very limited. At
     national level, other actors emerged on secondary use of health data than the ones
     represented in the eHealth Network. Some Member States set up different bodies to deal
     with the subject and participated in the Joint Action TEHDaS. However, neither the Joint
     Action TEHDaS, nor the numerous funds provided by the Commission under e.g. Horizon
     Europe to support the secondary use of health data have sufficiently been realized in
     coherence with eHN activities.

     It can therefore be concluded that the current structure of the eHealth Network does not
     appear to be appropriate anymore, as it only allows for soft cooperation on primary use of
     data and interoperability, which did not solve in a systematic manner the problems of
     access and portability of data at national and cross-border level. Moreover, the eHealth
     Network is not able to address in particular the needs related to the secondary use of health
     data in an effective and efficient manner. The legal base for the use of health data for
     primary and secondary use is not sufficiently strong.

     The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted and emphasised the importance of access to and
     availability of public health and healthcare data beyond the Member States borders.
     However, progress on these issues seems to be hindered by the absence of binding or
     compulsory standards across the EU and consequently limited interoperability. Addressing
     this issue would not just benefit the patients, but also contribute to the achievement of the
     Digital Single Market and lowering the barriers to the free movement of digital healthcare
     products and services.

     2.2   2.2               What are the problems?

     As explained above, due to the voluntary measures, the current regulatory framework has
     shown a limited effectiveness in supporting patients’ control over their health data at
     national and cross-border level and very low effectiveness on secondary uses of health
     data. However, the COVID-19 crisis has revealed the need and the high potential for
     interoperability and harmonisation, building upon existing technical expertise at national
     level. The figure on Overview of problems in Annex 4 shows the key problems that were
     identified.

     Individuals have difficulties to exercise their right to control their health data,
     including accessing and porting their data nationally and cross-borders, because of
     fragmented tools and infrastructures and limited interoperability between them. This
     hampers their access to health services and cause healthcare system ineffectiveness
     (reduced continuity of care) and inefficiencies (waste and administrative burden). It can
     result in medical errors, unnecessary repeated testsxcix and substantial inefficiencies and
     costs for patients, healthcare professionals and healthcare systemsc.

     The problem exists both at the EU, but also at the Member States level, despite the legal
     provisions of GDPR in this respect. The way the GDPR has been implemented is rather
     fragmented and made difficult the access and sharing of health data, as shown by the table
     below. As described in the section 1.3, data may not be available immediately and in
     electronic format and the portability right does not cover all the needs of the health sector
     (e.g. portability of images, laboratory results, which are not provided by the data subject,
     data processed on other legal basis than consent or contract or data from some public
     entities). The Annex 8 concerning the way the GDPR has been implemented in health


19
     sector shows the high legal fragmentation, which makes difficult to harmonise the
     framework both cross-border and between different healthcare providers at national level.

     At the same time, without the technical elements aimed to ensure interoperability, these
     rights are not effectively implemented. A recent study on interoperability of EHRsci shows
     that access to health information for citizens has been facilitated nationwide in seventeen
     EU/EEA countries, while six countries have ongoing pilot projects, three countries do not
     offer access to health data for patients, four countries offer mobile access, and two
     countries still use paper print-outs. In addition, citizens of 12 countries are not entitled to
     choose which healthcare professional or other party can access their EHR (often, general
     practitioners act as 'data gatekeepers', allowing additional parties to access a patient's EHR,
     while in other countries, this is not possible technically). The study also shows that 18
     Member States allow the exchange of health data across borders and that almost half of the
     Member States have devolved powers in digital health to decentralised governments, often
     further exacerbating the current fragmentation and patchwork of incompatible health data
     exchange formats and networks. Three Member States do not have rules in place for the
     identification and authentication of healthcare professionals. Patient Summaries and
     ePresription exists in two-thirds of the Member States. When it comes to connecting
     healthcare providers to the national EHRs, general practitioners are largely connected in
     20 Member States, pharmacies are connected in 19 Member States and labs are connected
     in 20 Member States. Several Member States score weak on the connection of different
     healthcare providers to the national EHR system.

     With regards to cross-border data sharing, as part of the evaluation of the CBHC Directive,
     the volume of patient mobility was studied. The aggregated reported data on the number of
     requests for reimbursement shows that patient mobility under the Directive remains
     generally very low. When looking at the total expenditure on cross border healthcare, in
     those countries that were able to provide information about the amount reimbursed for
     healthcare subject and/or not subject to prior authorisation in 2019, the total healthcare
     spending amounted to EUR 882 billion. The share of the amount reimbursed under the
     Directive on the total government expenditure on healthcare amounted to 0.01%
     (EUR 92.1 million/EUR 882 billion). Cross-border healthcare in general remains very
     limited, and most of the healthcare spending occurs domestically. However, it should be
     noted that the demand for certain cross-border health services for which interoperability is
     highly relevant is growing rapidly. For example, the assessment of the cross-border
     prescriptions use case has provided indicative evidence of an estimated increase of
     approximately 300% for foreign prescriptions presented to pharmacists in the EU between
     2012 and 2021 (from 1.46 foreign prescriptions per pharmacy per month in 2012 to 5.87 in
     2021).

     When travelling or moving to another EU country, few citizens can currently share their
     health data with foreign healthcare providers in a language understandable to the health
     professional, which can lead to wrong diagnosis or treatments and impact on free
     movement. The overall number of cross-border transactions so far remains low compared
     to potential demand: over 200 million Europeans have a European Health Insurance Card
     and 4% of employees are nationals of another Member State cii which could benefit from
     cross-border provision of healthcare. Patient summaries and e-prescription services exist in
     two-thirds of all Member States and are most frequently accessed via online portal, but
     only in few countries can have them be sent or received across borders and 11 countries
     are still using paper printouts for prescriptionsciii. Through MyHealth@EUciv, 10 out of 27
     Member States allow their patients to share their patient summaries and ePrescriptions
     with healthcare providers in other Member States, in the language of the country of


20
     destination. Since 2019 over 21,000 ePrescriptions have been dispensed and over 300
     patient summaries have been accessed in other countries and other languages than the
     country of the origin of the patient. The number of ePrescriptions dispensed remains far
     from the target number of up to 8 million prescriptions issued in another Member State
     than the Member State where the patient tries to have them dispensedcv.

     In an online stakeholder survey, a broad majority of consulted respondents (>80%)
     agree that lack of practical data portability driven by strong rules on interoperability
     drives healthcare costs up through repeated testing and examination, slows down
     time to diagnosis and treatment and increases the risk of errors cvi. Access and sharing
     of data are important for stakeholders, particularly the right to access one's health data in
     electronic format, including those stored by healthcare providers (88%), right to transmit
     one's health data in electronic format to another professional/entity of one's choice (84%),
     the right to request healthcare providers to transmit one's health data in one's electronic
     health record (83%), and the right to request public healthcare providers to share
     electronically one's health data with other healthcare providers/entities of one's choice
     (82%). 80% of EU citizens consider that a European framework on the access and
     exchange of personal health data should aim at facilitating the delivery of healthcare for
     citizens at national level and 84% abroad. 85% of EU citizens that participated in the
     public consultation believe that a European framework on the access and exchange of
     personal health data should aim at promoting citizens’ control over their own health data,
     including access to health data and transmission of their health data in electronic format.
     More details concerning the opinion of different stakeholder group can be found in Annex
     2.

     Due to different standards and limited interoperability, manufacturers of digital health
     services and products face barriers and additional costs when entering the markets of
     other Member States, hampering their competitiveness. The digitalisation of health
     systems is limited and often the health IT solutions, whether they are health apps, medical
     device software, EHR systems or other health software, are not interoperable amongst each
     other, causing lock-in situations and inefficiencies in the provision of health and in the
     reuse of health data. The Commission has adopted the Recommendation on European
     Electronic Health Record Exchange Format (EEHRxF)cvii and the eHealth Network
     recommendedcviii all the national and EU procurers to require EEHRxF standards and
     specifications to ensure national and cross-country interoperability. However, the
     implementation of these recommendations remains uneven is: four Member States do not
     have a fully functioning EHR system, six show an overall low level of use across all EHR
     data types, whilst only four have a very high level of usecix. The voluntary
     recommendations on the EEHRxF have had little effect in promoting interoperability
     amongst health software solutionscx. Annex 10 provide an overview of the interoperability
     challenges and the opinions concerning the EEHRxF Recommendation.

     The ePrescriptions, another information domain in the Recommendation also shows a
     mixed picture: in only half of EU Member States, the pharmacy sector in Europe is almost
     completely connected to national EHR systems and service-related data is being
     exchanged between pharmacies and EHRs. Five countries do not have an ePrescription
     system in place. At the same time, the limited use of ePrescriptions come with costs, as
     ePrescribing reduces medication errors. According to the Estonian Health Information
     Fund, 80,000 patients (6% of the total) could benefit from error reduction thanks to
     ePrescribing, while errors in prescription were down by 15% in Sweden cxi. ePrescribing
     systems can also provide useful data on patients’ adherence to prescribed medicationscxii.
     When it comes to coding and structuring data, in most countries, the amount of clearly


21
     structured electronic health data is low and most of them do not maintain any programmes
     to train healthcare staff or to audit data qualitycxiii. Moreover, only half of EU countries
     implement measures and perform mapping activities to international standards (including
     those in the EEHRxF Recommendation) to enable interoperability with digital health
     systems in other countriescxiv. Nine out of 27 Member States and Norway indicate to not
     refer to EU-level guidelines and documents on the patient summary and
     ePrescription/eDispensation in national policy documents and 19 do not refer to these
     resources in legislation documents. Although almost two thirds of EU countries have
     enacted compulsory technological standards, only half of national digital health authorities
     promote the use of the EU tools and building blocks of the MyHealth@EUcxv.

     While the cooperation at EU level has focused mostly on interoperability of EHRs, some
     countries have started to implement legislative frameworks on assessment, reimbursement
     schemes, labelling and certification for the adoption of digital health, such as DiGA
     framework in Germanycxvi, the mHealth pyramid in Belgiumcxvii, ANS eHealth label and
     HAS mHealth in France, or MAST CIMT in Denmarkcxviii (a more comprehensive
     overview is available in Annex 7). Some of these systems, such as DiGA take medical
     devices, analyse them from the perspective of interoperability with electronic health
     records and impact on health and propose them for prescription or reimbursement by
     healthcare providers. A similar system is being implemented by Belgium cxix. France is also
     working on a law for a similar system. The United States also analyses the interoperability
     of medical devices with the hospital environment, but also with the electronic health
     recordscxx. This analys is often done by digital health bodies (not notified bodies).
     However, this approach remains limited, and many Member States requested a mutual
     recognition of such products. The first technical specification on a quality label for health
     and wellness apps was published by ISO, CEN and IEC in 2021cxxi. Although the volume
     of applications approved for prescription is currently very low, e.g. with only 24 mobile
     health applications approved for a population with statutory health insurance of over 70
     millioncxxii, as long as these approaches continue to be implemented without a common
     framework, there is an increasing risk of fragmentation within the EU. This adversely
     affects companies wishing to operate across the European digital single market, as their
     cross-border operations are hindered by differing digital structures, differing data formats
     and incompatible infrastructures. This is in line with the views of industry representatives
     who indicate that the European market is fragmented, with significant barriers for
     operation in more than one countrycxxiii cxxiv.

     Individuals cannot benefit from innovative treatments and policy-makers cannot
     react effectively to health crises, due to barriers impeding researchers, innovators,
     policy-makers and regulators to access health data. The evaluation of the digital
     aspects of the CBHC Directive shows a very low effectiveness of the eHealth Network in
     dealing with secondary use of health data, while new entities (such as Health Data Access
     Bodies) have started to emerge in several Member States. Divergent rules and frameworks,
     prevent data holders from facilitating reuse of health datacxxv. The over-reliance on consent
     (which can be difficultcxxvi and costly to obtain) and a lack of specific Member State law
     has increased the costs for research. The wide variety of GDPR legal bases applied by
     different data holders in different Member States has made cross-country studies very
     difficult, as data re-users must comply with different requirements in each jurisdictioncxxvii
     cxxviii
             .

     As indicated by experts consulted on pharmaceutical regulatory frameworks, currently,
     studies which inform regulatory decisions are often performed in a small set of databases
     clustered in a few EU Member States, limiting geographical and demographic


22
     representability. To overcome this fragmentation and the reliance on consent, some
     Member States started to adopt national law for processing health data for public interest,
     scientific research and policy making. For instance, 13 Member States have started to put
     forward more centralised national systems to provide access to data, but there is no link
     between them at EU level, the system remains fragmented and there ae differeencies
     between their tasks, even though they share many commonalities. Some Member States
     support access to data held by the original controller, others act as a Health Data Access
     Body. The best-known Health Data Access Bodies are Findata, French Data Hub, German
     Forschungsdatenzentren, Danish and Norwegian Health Data Access Bodiescxxix (details
     about the state of play are available in Annex 9).

     During the public consultation, several barriers were identified by both the Member
     States and stakeholders, which include the divergencies in national legal frameworks and
     practices, which have repercussions on standards adopted and interoperability, as well the
     different national healthcare systems across Member States. Some Member States
     mentioned that one of the main issues was the sensitivity of the data which may make it
     difficult to transfer across countries on an individual level. This is aggravated by different
     data anonymization procedures across institutes and countries, as well as varying
     interpretations of GDPR. Other Memebr States stated that the different legal grounds for
     data sharing across Member States may require the researchers to travel across borders if
     the data must stay within a country. Furthermore, it was noted that data is currently not
     organized in one data centre base as various data sources are not linked in a structured
     way. Some decentralised countries underlined that most data collections for secondary use
     happen at the local level. Therefore, considerable collaboration between the public and
     private spheres would be needed. Several Member States underlined the need to ensure
     adequate financial resources. Moreover, interoperability issues could arise as some
     countries do not have plans to even introduce patient summaries. Some Member States
     also admit having difficulties with the legislation allowing for data sharing within the
     country, which would only be exacerbated at international level.




23
     Table 1. Key characteristics of data governance bodies (‘centralised’ governance bodies)cxxx (for some Member States information is missing, either as the country correspondent
     did not consider the body as a centralised body or the information was missing).

     Exists at national level                                                                                                  13   BG, DK, DE, IE, GR, FR, CY, MT, NL, PT, SI, SK, FI, [UK]
     Public sector entity                                                                                                      13   BG, DK, DE, IE, GR, FR, CY, MT, NL, PT, SI, SK, FI
     Hosts data                                                                                                                8    FR, BG, DK, DE, GR, NL, FI, SK, [UK]
     Provides access to data stored with the original data controller                                                          2    RO, FI, [UK]
     Type of data to which access is provided                                   Primary care electronic health records         5    DE, MT, NL, PT, SI
                                                                                Hospital electronic health records             7    DK, DE, FR, MT, NL, PT, SI
                                                                                Social or long-term care                       4    DK, DE, NL, SI
                                                                                Health insurance claims data                   5    DK, DE, GR FR, NL
                                                                                Prescribing and dispensation records           7    DK, DE, GR, FR, NL, PT, SI
                                                                                Disease registries                             7    BG, DK, GR, MT, NL, PT, SI
                                                                                Bio banks                                      1    DK
                                                                                Genomic data bases                             1    DK
                                                                                Linked health, social and environmental data   6    BG, DK, DE, MT, NL, SI
                                                                                Other                                          3    IE, CY, FI
     Available for research for health system monitoring, manage-ment and                                                      12   BG, DK, DE, IE, GR, FR, CY, MT, NL, PT, SI, FI, [UK]
     evaluation by a public sector entity (Function 2)
     Available for research for medi- cines and device monitoring and                                                          10   BG, DK, DE, IE, FR, CY, MT, NL, SI, FI, [UK]
     evaluation (including pharmaco-vigilance) by public sector organisations
     (including regulators) (Function 2)
     Available for scientific research by not-for-profit and academic                                                          12   BG, DK, DE, IE, GR, FR, CY, MT, NL, PT, SI, FI, [UK]
     organisations (Function 3)
     Available for scientific research by commercial scientific organisations                                                  10   BG, DK, DE, FR, CY, MT, NL, PT, SI, FI, [UK]
     (including pharmaceutical and medical technology industry)                 Possible under the same conditions as for      5    BG, FR, MT, NL, FI
     (Function 3)                                                               public entities
                                                                                Possible under different conditions            3    DK, DE, SI
     Available for scientific research by any commercial organisation                                                          4    BG, DE, SI, FI
     (Function 3)
     Available for data requests from researchers in other EU MSM                                                              5    DK, DE, FR, NL, FI, [UK]
     Charges access fees                                                        No                                             5    GR, FR, CY, MT, PT

                                                                                Yes                                            6    BG, DK, DE, NL, SI, FI
                                                                                Same fee for all                               4    BG, DK, NL, FI
                                                                                Differentiated fees                            2    DE, SI




24
     According to a report by Deloittecxxxi, productivity of research and development in the
     biopharmaceutical sector has steadily decreased over the last decade, while the cost of
     bringing of a new product to market has significantly increasedcxxxii. If this trend persists,
     the industry will see less and less incentives to invest in the risky and costly search for
     health innovations, limiting their future ability to provide innovative health products to
     tackle current and emerging health needs.
     Similarly, the health data reuse ecosystem is characterised by fragmented
     infrastructurescxxxiii, structured around health-specific subdomains and limited
     interoperability. The lack of re-use of health data also poses problems for the work of
     regulators, which rely on Real World Evidence to check for the effectiveness of medicines.
     This can also stifle innovation and the development of new medicine, which in turn affects
     patients. Data quality issues play an important role as the data collected must fulfil certain
     uniform standards to be fit for purpose. The various degrees of data quality and availability
     across Member States and health subdomains also impacts on the ability to develop and
     evaluate AI algorithms, as health data that is comparable and representative of the EU’s
     population becomes difficult to obtain.

     2.3   2.3                What are the problem drivers?

     There are fragmented and limited tools for timely access to health data in electronic
     format and their digital transmission causing cumbersome problems for individuals to
     access and control their own health data, including in the cross-border setting. Not all the
     Member States have set up EHR systems and not all of them are interoperable between
     healthcare providers or with different data sources (e.g. mHealth, telehealth)cxxxiv cxxxv. In a
     third of EU countries, digital health policy is not integrated into general healthcare
     policycxxxvi. Divergent regulations at Member State levelcxxxvii do not enable sustainable
     data-sharing amongst stakeholders and exercising portability of health data, both
     nationally and in the cross-border context. While the 'right to access one's health data in
     electronic format, including those stored by healthcare providers (public or private)' was
     deemed by 88% of the respondents in the public consulation as the most important right,
     evidencecxxxviii shows that, while legislation in almost all (93%) Member States enables the
     electronic storage of health data, support for the access to and sharing of health related
     data is missing from legislation in almost one third of Member States. In 43% of Member
     States, legislation and national rules do not allow citizens to choose whom to provide
     access with to their health data. In 57% of Member States, less than half of Patient
     Summaries are consulted by a health professional in another medical institution. Imaging
     reports are predominantly exchanged non-electronicallycxxxix. At cross-border level, half
     of the EU population has a European Health Insurance Card and could potentially benefit
     from healthcare abroad, only 7 Member States (less than 10% of EU population) are able
     to share or consult patient summaries from another Member State through MyHealth@EU,
     and medical images are not exchanged yet. Preliminary results in the context of the
     evaluation of the CBHC Directive indicate that almost 8 million cross-border prescriptions
     are presented for dispensation per year in EU, with a non-dispensation rate cxlof 46%cxli,
     which could generate up to EUR 240 million in unnecessary costs yearlycxlii.Verification
     and language issues and missing information are the key problem drivers for non-
     dispensation. These could be solved by the full rollout of cross-border services in
     MyHealth@EUcxliii.




25
     Limited legal and technical interoperability, including in relation to cybersecurity
     and data protection aspects, across Member States are barriers for providers of
     digital health services and products when entering the markets of other Member
     States. As shown above and in Annex 10, there is low and fragmented implementation of
     common standards and specifications at national and especially EU level. Many healthcare
     providers implement un-interoperable/locked in IT systems, which would require
     significant investment to be upgraded and contribute to perpetuate the lack of
     interoperability. Over the past 10 years, European cooperation has focused on data
     domains and interoperability of EHRs. However, with the deployment of other digital
     health technologies (such as wearable and mobile), Member States have started to develop
     separate national schemes to support uptake according to national needs, but without a
     common EU framework for assessing interoperability and cybersecurity, which are
     fundamental for the secure flow of health data in the single market. This is caused, at least
     partly, by the fact that by a lack of specific mandate of the EU and the eHealth Network in
     this areacxliv. EIT Health analysed several use cases in digital health and concluded that a
     consolidated European assessment framework for digital health solutions could easy the
     route to market for small companiescxlv. The Data Act proposal will provide a general
     obligation to make data accesible and portable for the user of product or related services.
     But it is limited to tangible item and may not cover purely software or service-based health
     systems, such as electronic health records. Moreover, it will not impose specific standards
     and specifications that EHDS would come forward for the health sector.

     Fragmented and divergent legal and administrative rules, frameworks, processes,
     standards and infrastructures for health data reuse restrict the access of researchers
     and innovators to health data, limiting the availability for individuals of innovative health
     products and services based on health data use and reuse, and reduce the access of policy-
     makers and regulators to health data for their tasks and to react to health crises, hampering
     optimal decision-making and particularly effective crisis management. 89% of respondents
     to the public consultation from all stakeholder groups completely agree that the European
     framework on access and exchange of personal health data should support and accelerate
     health research. Annex 10 shows the current fragmentation, at Member State level, of the
     legal basis available to researchers for the reuse of health data initially collected for
     healthcare purposes. Almost half of the Member States do not have any specific legislation
     for such reuse and rely on the provisions of the GDPR. Other Member States provide a
     legal basis based on public interest outside the traditional requirement of consent and rely
     on an independent public body for this (i.e. a Health Data Access Bodycxlvi). Not all the
     Member States have a Data Access Body, but where such a body exists, the demand is
     very high (the Finnish Health Data Access Body, Findata, has an average queueing time
     for data permits of around 7-9 monthscxlvii, while the Danish counterpart has an average
     processing time of over 100 working days). There is also a need for cross-country
     cooperation between existing data access bodies. Data quality issues, such as lack of
     accurate metadata, divergent data collection procedures or unstructured data, pose a key
     challenge for extensive data-sharing, use and reuse in health. Most health data is
     unstructuredcxlviii, often fragmented, which becomes a barrier for the use and reuse of
     health data due to low technical and semantic interoperabilitycxlixclcli. These challenges
     have become even more apparent during the COVID-19 pandemic, as researchers,
     innovators and policy-makers have struggled to gain access to comparable health datasets
     in a timely mannerclii.




26
     2.4       2.4           How will the problem evolve?

     Several problems will persist if no EU action is taken. The cross-border exchange of health
     data will remain limited, the expansion of MyHealth@EU will progress at a slow pace on
     a voluntary basis only and the barriers to a single digital health market will equally persist.
     With a slower uptake of digital health, patients will continue to experience disruption to
     continuity of care and healthcare providers will continue to struggle with accessing
     medical information timely in the provision of care, causing inefficiencies and ineffective
     healthcare and avoidable medical errors. Health software providers and researchers too
     will struggle to provide services that serve the interests of people and healthcare providers.
     Health software solutions will not sufficiently take into account the needs and preferences
     of end users, which will impede uptake from and value for the latter. Given the lack of
     adequate incentives for interoperability and health data exchanges, the digital health
     market will continue to cope with vendor lock-in situations, as there will be no common
     interoperability requirements facilitating provider changes and market entry. Such a
     situation will favour incumbents and prevent a level playing field. If the single digital
     health market is insufficiently supported, the uptake of digital health innovations will be
     slower and more expensive. Producers of digital health services will not market their
     products in other Member States or will incur additional costs stemming from the
     adaptation to the national standards. Policy makers will have insufficient access to
     evidence to support their regulatory activities. Citizens will continue to have limited digital
     access to and control over their health data in digital format, which will limit their
     empowerment and may weaken their trust in health technology. The limited reuse of health
     data for research, innovation, policy-making and regulatory purposes would hamper the
     introduction of more efficient and effective healthcare and public health policy.

     With insufficient action taken, there will be untapped potential of digital health services
     and products for people and healthcare systems. Potential benefits for patients, through
     greater availability of health innovations, would not materialise. For example,
     telemonitoring can facilitate access to healthcare in medical desertscliii, and AI-based
     medical decision support systems can facilitate diagnosis and treatment, but both require
     extensive research and development based on health data and proper interoperability with
     healthcare IT systems. Lack of trust of the public in health technology tools would
     frustrate the potential benefits for health. In the case of a new pandemic, Europe will
     continue to struggle to provide data for policy making, regulatory purposes and
     support scientific research, statistics and innovation for the general interest.

     3     3                 WHY SHOULD THE EU ACT?

     3.1       3.1           Legal basis

     The possible legal bases for the proposed initiative are Articles 16 (personal data
     protection) and 114 (internal market) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European
     Union (TFEU).

     The initiative will build on the possibilities offered by articles 9(2)(h), 9(2)(i) and 9(2)(j)
     of GDPR to use the data for healthcare and re-use it for public interest and for scientific
     research. Therefore, the initiative has two purposes: to further strengthen the rights of
     individuals in relation to control of their personal health data, building upon the rights
     already provided by the GDPR; to promote the exchange of health data for healthcare
     provision, to facilitating access to health and relevant social data for further processing for
     research, innovation, policy-making and regulatory decision. Health data are particularly


27
     sensitive data and their treatment is already strictly regulated by GDPR, which stipulated
     that national or EU law making use of e.g. Articles 9(2)(i) and 9(2)(j) must lay down
     suitable and specific safeguards The GDPR provides important safeguards in relation to
     rights of individuals over their health data (even though some additional requirements are
     needed for health sectorcliv). However, as outlined in section 1, in practice, in the field of
     health data, limited harmonisation of requirements and technical standards
     implemented at national and EU level do not allow to implement these provisions in
     practice for every individual. Therefore, there is a need to introduce additional legally
     binding provisions and safeguards, as well as design specific requirements and standards
     in order to fully implement the rights provided in the GDPR in the field of the processing
     of health data and take advantage of the value of health data for the public interest. Hence,
     to the extent that Article 16 TFEU prescribes the purposes of both the protection of
     personal data and the free movement of such data, it is deduced that Article 16 TFEU is a
     relevant legal basis for the proposed initiative.

     Digitalisation and data are transforming the way of healthcare is provided, in many cases
     offering an alternative to traditional physical interactions, which has a particularly
     beneficial impact for remote and rural areas. However, the growing diversity of national
     laws, regulations and administrative actions lead to obstacles to the free movement of
     data, which has a substantial impact on the free movement of digital technologies in
     healthcare that contact such data (including AI systems), the free movement of
     persons, as well as creating distortions to competition. Some Member States, for
     example, have already developed often different national or regional rules for the
     standards related to development and recognition of new digital health services and
     products, but others have not. This will likely lead to a further fragmentation of the
     internal market, as providers of these digital health products and services will need to
     adapt to these different rules when marketing and competing on digital health products and
     services.

     The obstacles to free movement and distortions of competition have a detrimental impact
     on the functioning of the internal market. EU action on the basis of Article 114 of the
     TFEU can be taken for the purposes of the approximation of the provisions laid down by
     law, regulations or administrative actions in the Member States when it has as its object
     the establishment and functioning of the internal market. The measures assessed in this
     impact assessment for creation of an EHDS aim to improve the conditions for the
     establishment and functioning of the internal market for digital health and data and
     actually contribute to eliminating the obstacles to the free movement of healthcare goods
     and services.While a smoother flow of health data could eventually contribute to the
     protection of human health (through better, more efficient and targeted healthcare, more
     powered research and better tailored public health policies), the main drivers of this
     initiative are the free movement and protection of (non-)personal data and the internal
     market, which will reflect the selection of legal basis for the legal proposal. The EHDS is a
     tool aimed to improve access to quality health data for both primary and secondary use. It
     will be the task of data users to implement uses that could improve the health outcome of
     data subjects. Thus, Article 168 was not selected as a potential legal basis since the effect
     of such a tool on health outcomes is a secondary effect of the main aims of the initiative.
     Moreover, Article 168 of the TFEU provides for a more limited scope for Union
     intervention, which would not allow to tackle the problems that have been identified in the
     problem definition, such as supporting control of patients over their health data by
     improving interoperability, allowing the digital health products and services to circulate
     freely within the EU and re-using health data.



28
     3.2   3.2               Subsidiarity and Proportionality

     Even though the GDPR provides some extensive rights concerning individuals’ access to
     and transmission of their health data, their practical implementation is limited by low
     interoperability, which has been addressed so far mainly through soft law instruments.
     Such difference in national standards and specifications can also prevent producers of
     digital health services and products to enter new markets, where they need to adapt to new
     standards. Evidence from the public consultation shows, there is support for being able to
     transmit data from mHealth into the EHR systems (77%) and for the introduction of a
     certification scheme to assess interoperability of digital health products and services
     (52%). As the evaluation of Article 14 of the CBHC Directive shows, the approaches taken
     so far, consisting of low intensity/soft instruments, such as guidelines and
     recommendations aimed to support interoperability, have not produced the desired results.
     Moreover, national approaches in addressing the problems have only limited scope and do
     not fully address the EU-wide issue.

     A true internal market of digital health products and services is promoted when people can
     take their health data with them and when health data can be accessed cross-border, while
     respecting data protection rules and a high level of security. The COVID-19 pandemic and
     EU Digital COVID Certificates shows that a strong legal basis and a common EU
     approach to use of health data for specific purposes, as well as EU efforts to ensure legal,
     semantic and technical interoperability, can significantly support the free movement of
     people and can transform the EU into a global standard setter. Therefore, EU-wide action
     in the content and form indicated is required to promote cross-border flow of health data
     and such action does not exceed what is necessary to achieve the Treaty objectives.

     The extensive use of facultative specification clauses under the GDPR at national levelclv
     created fragmentation and difficulties for accessing data, both at national level and
     between Member States, impacting on the possibility of researchers, policy makers and
     regulators to carry out their tasks or to do research or innovation, with negative effects on
     the European economy. Moreover, Member States’ health datasets often lack the diversity
     or size required to detect weak health pattern or to being suitable for machine learning.
     Accessing EU-wide health datasets is a necessity, for actors in this domain can develop
     more accurate and inclusive AI-based devices solutions and AI algorithms.

     The current situation of fragmentation, differences and barriers to access and use health
     data, shows that action by Member States alone is not sufficient and may hamper the rapid
     development and deployment of digital health products and services and of AI. Moreover,
     GDPR foresees the possibility of an EU law as the legal basis for processing health data
     for research, innovation, policy making, regulatory purposes and statistics. As analysed in
     section 6, concerted actions by all Member States will reduce the economic and
     administrative burden to access health data, supporting single market. The detailed
     analysis on the proposal’s financial impacts indicates that action at EU level complies with
     both the principle of subsidiarity and proportionality. Furthermore, the analysis on the
     impacts of different policy options, including economic, social and environmental,
     international impacts as well as impacts on fundamental rights, single market,
     competitiveness and SMEs show in both qualitative and quantitative terms that the Union
     objectives in question can be better achieved at Union level. Additionally, the detailed
     analysis of the different possible options in pursuing the Union objectives indicate the
     content and form of Union action that does not exceed what is necessary to achieve the
     objectives of the Treaties.



29
     4     4                 OBJECTIVES: WHAT IS TO BE ACHIEVED?

     4.1       4.1           General objective

     The general objective of the intervention is to establish a genuine single market for digital
     health and to ensure that individuals have access to and control over their own health data,
     can benefit from a wealth of innovative health products and services based on health data
     use and reuse, and that researchers, innovators, policy-makers and regulators can make the
     most of the available health data for their work, while preserving trust and security.

     4.2       4.2           Specific objectives

     4.2.1 4.2.1      Empower citizens through increased control of their personal health
           data and support their free movement by ensuring that health data follows them
           (SO1)

     The EHDS would aim at empowering citizens through increased digital control of their
     personal health data and support their free movement by ensuring that health data follows
     them. The Public Consultation findings show that there is wide support for EHDS to
     promote citizens’ control over their own health data, with 85% of EU citizens, 83% of
     public authorities and 94% of industry supporting this objective. With measures
     strengthening the control of individuals over their own health data, the EHDS would allow
     health data to be used when and where individuals need it, regardless of the data source
     (e.g. EHR systems, medical devices, or wellness applications) or type of data controller
     (public or private), promoting continuity of care and patient safety. This empowerment of
     individuals will also help build confidence of society in the use and reuse of health data.
     The availability of the necessary health data when receiving health services, combined
     with a faster digitalisation in healthcare, would contribute to mitigate some of the
     inefficiencies in the health sector.

     4.2.2 4.2.2       Unleash the data economy by fostering a genuine single market for
           digital health services and products (SO2)

     The EHDS would aim at unleashing the data economy by fostering a genuine single
     market for digital health services and products. It will tackle issues related to
     interoperability, security and other related aspects in the exchange, use and reuse of health
     data for the provision of healthcare, research and innovation, policy-making and regulatory
     activities. The Public Consultation findings show that there is wide support for the EU to
     establish interoperability standards for secondary use of health data, with 88% support
     from public authorities and 91% support from industry. By addressing interoperability
     discrepancies within the single market, the EHDS would reduce obstacles to the free
     movement of goods and services, as well as distortions of competition within internal
     market, thus increasing efficiencies, the societal and economic welfare of individuals,
     manufacturers and healthcare providers.

     4.2.3 4.2.3        Ensure a consistent and efficient framework for the reuse of
           individuals’ health data for research, innovation, policy-making and regulatory
           activities (SO3)

     The EHDS would aim at ensuring a consistent and efficient framework for the reuse of
     health data in the EU, particularly regarding the handling of health data requests, access
     procedures and secure infrastructures, and common governance mechanisms. The Public


30
     Consultation findings show that there is great support for EU coordination to bring
     together national bodies on secondary use of health data on a range of issues, with 59%
     support from public authorities, 73% from EU citizens and 75% from industry. Reuse, or
     cases for secondary uses of health (including electronic health records, registries and
     networks of registries, genetic data etc.) and social data (including claims registries and
     other relevant information), on the basis of public/general interest are defined broadly as
     falling under four five categories, both for public or private entities: covering research,
     innovation, policy-making and regulatory activities and personalised medicine. This
     should enable trustful reuse of health and relevant social data for the public good,
     producing value for society, under strict control and safeguards to ensure respect for high
     standards of data protection and security and privacy, regardless the nature of the reuser
     (public or private entity). It would also impact on the data quality, as well as on the
     capacity of producing more effective policies and more research and innovation, by
     making data cheaper. Such a change would be possible by progressively shifting from a
     situation where data is obtained almost exclusively based on consent, which is very costly
     or not feasible in case of big cohorts to a situation where access to data can be done against
     a fee, which may often be cheaper (for more details, see the economic analysis of options 2
     and 3 on secondary use of data and Annex 5 on methodological approach). The high
     demand towards the existing data access bodies reveals this situation.

     4.3                         4.3                          Objectives tree/intervention logic
            objectives
             General




                                         Ensure that individuals have control over their own health data, can benefit from a wealth of innovative health products and
                                       services based on health data use and reuse, and that researchers, innovators, policy-makers and regulators can make the most of
                                                                          the available health data, while preserving trust and security
           Specific objectives




                                         Strengthen individuals              Ensure the proper functioning          Ensure a consistent and efficient framework for the
                                         control over their own               of the single market in the              reuse of individuals health data for research,
                                          personal health data                   area of digital health             innovation, policy-making and regulatory activities




                                       Fragmented and limited tools
                                                                              Limited legal and technical
                                       for individuals control over                                                 Fragmented and divergent legal and administrative
           Drivers




                                                                          interoperability and cybersecurity
                                          their own health data in                                                     rules, frameworks, processes, standards and
                                                                         (fragmented landscape of standards,
                                        electronic format and their                                                        infrastructures for health data re-use
                                                                              formats and requirements)
                                            digital transmission




                                      Cumbersome individuals                  Providers of digital health           Individuals do not have          Policy-makers and
           Problems




                                    control over their own health             services and products face             access to a wealth of        regulators cannot easily
                                   data limits their access to health        barriers and additional costs        innovative health products        access health data for
                                   services, including in the cross-         when entering the markets of        and services based on health      their tasks and to react
                                            border setting                       other Member States                  data use and reuse               to health crisis



                                                                             Figure 6. Intervention Logic.
     Figure 6 shows the intervention logic based on the presented general and specific
     objectives, problem drivers and problems.

     5            5                                           WHAT ARE THE AVAILABLE POLICY OPTIONS?

     Three policy options, with increasing degrees of intensity, are presented in Table 2 and 3.
     The policy options build upon horizontal and sectorial existing and planned legislative
     frameworks, particularly on the Data Governance Act (DGA), Data Act and the GDPR, as
     explained in the Introduction and Annex 6. All three options benefit from a horizontal set
     of safety and security measures to ensure individuals trustworthiness on the European
     Health Data Space. These measures include:



31
     Primary use of health data: health data is collected, stored, and in many cases also
     exchanged already now. The exchange is done through point-to-point encrypted
     connections, or in some Member States through national systems. The goal is to enable
     more Europeans to benefit from the availability of their data for a seamless diagnostic and
     treatment, also building on the Data Act. Under options 2 and 3, information blocking by
     healthcare providers and digital health services would be prohibited. Minimum
     requirements for data security will be defined and digital health products would show
     compliance with these requirements. Cross-border exchange of health data in
     MyHealth@EU is performed through National Contact Points for eHealth that have
     undergone audits/compliance checks. The audits include criteria related to information
     security, but also data protection, including Data Protection Impact Assessment. Similar
     mechanisms are envisaged for the infrastructure on secondary use of health data. With
     regards to data being shared with third country healthcare professionals, this may be done
     by the patient on a smart device. Online sharing/access of health data between systems is
     politically very sensitive and requires careful assessment from data protection and security
     perspective, as third countries need to meet the EU criteria.




32
     Table 2. Overview for primary uses of health data (covering mainly SO1 and SO2).

     Measure/                         Baseline:                              Policy Option 1: Strengthened        Policy Option 2:                                                 Policy Option 3: Regulatory
     dimension                        Voluntary cooperation                  EU coordination & soft               Regulatory intervention with medium intensity                    intervention     with  high
                                                                             regulatory measures                                                                                   intensity
     Individuals’ and health           General provisions in the GDPR and Guidelines for control over health      Right of patients’ control over health data in electronic format Same as Option 2
     professionals’ access and control Data Act, no specificities for health data                                 established at EU level
     over health data (SO1)
     Scope of data domains (SO1,        Guidelines on interoperability of    Guidelines on EEHRxF and other       Implementing/delegated acts on interoperability, security,     Same as in Option 2
     SO2)                              data domains in the European          data domains (e.g. mobile heath)     data protection for data domains covered in the EEHRxF;
                                       electronic health record exchange                                          adding other data domains in digital health through tertiary
                                       format (EEHRxF)clvi                                                        legislation
     Quality and interoperability-Requirements established nationally -Same as in Baseline                        -Minimum EU mandatory requirements for EHR systems and         - Minimum EU mandatory
     requirements                      - Guidelines/recommedations           -Guidelines on interoperability of   medical devices that can input data in EHRs; Mandatory self-   requirements for EHR systems,
                                       focusing on interoperability of data data domains for EEHRxF and           declared quality label scheme.                                 digital health products that are
                                       domains for EEHRxF, and on            other digital health domains, and    -EU recommended specifications for wellness applications;      medical devices and certain
                                       identity management                   identity management                  Voluntary self-declared quality label                          wellness applications
                                                                            -Voluntary quality label for                                                                         -      Mandatory      third-party
                                                                            interoperability of EHR systems, Option 2+: Minimum EU mandatory requirements for EHR                certification scheme for EHR
                                                                            digital health products and mobile systems and medical devices that can input data in EHRs.          systems, digital health products
                                                                            wellness applications              - Mandatory third-party certification for EHR systems and         that are medical devices and
                                                                                                               medical devices entailing EHR data domains; progressive           wellness applications
                                                                                                               adding new devices, as standardisation advances.
                                                                                                               - Recommended EU specifications for wellness applications.
                                                                                                               Voluntary self-declared quality label
                                                                                                               - Enrollment of the certified and labelled products in an EU
                                                                                                               database.
     Cross-border health data sharing Voluntary deployment of               Same as in Baseline                Mandatory deployment of MyHealth@EU with a timeline for           Same as in Option 2, stricter
     (SO1, SO2)                       MyHealth@EU; Guidelines                                                  different existing services and possibility of new services       timeline for existing services
     Governance and EU cooperation Voluntary cooperation of national        Mandatory network of national      Designation of national digital health authorities for the        As for option 2 (national
     (SO1, SO2)                       digital health authorities (eHealth   digital health authorities         implementation/ enforcement of rights and requirements            authorities&tertiary legislation)
                                      Network)                              (strengthened eHealth Network)     EU coordination: expert group on primary use; cooperation         EU coordination : existing EU
                                                                                                               with other groups (cybersecurity, eID, data protection etc);      body (European Digital Health
                                                                                                               binding decision-making through implementing/delegated            Body)
                                                                                                               acts                                                              Option 3+: A new EU body




33
     Table 3. Overview for secondary use of health data (covering mainly SO2 and SO3).

     Measure/                   Baseline: No EU             Policy Option 1: Strengthened EU            Policy Option 2: Regulatory intervention with             Policy Option 3: Regulatory intervention with
     dimension                  cooperation framework       coordination & soft regulatory              medium intensity                                          high intensity
                                                            measures
     Reusers’ access to health Multitute of regimes:        Same as in Baseline                         Common European legal basis for reuse (public and    Same as Option 2
     data (researchers,         national legislation or     Guidelines on reuse of health data          private reusers and data holders) with safeguards
     innovators, policy-makers consent; EDPB guidelines                                                 (health data access bodies/DAB, secure environments)
     and regulators) (SO3)      on research
     Types of data in scope for Defined in separate         Same as in Baseline                         Specific categories of data defined in the European       Same as Option 2
     reuse (SO3)                national legal bases;       Guidelines on types of data for reuse       legal basis (clinical, administrative, social, enriched
                                GDPR and Data Act           and on voluntary sharing                    data); Data Act obligations for commercial data
     Data altruism (SO3)        Data Governance Act         Same as in Baseline                         Supervision of data altruism by Health Data Access        Same as Option 2
                                (DGA) applies                                                           Bodies (cooperating with DGAbodies)
     Digital infrastructure     - Possible disease-specific Extend (MyHealth@EU) to secondary           Mandatory participation in a new decentralised EU-        Mandatory participation in a new centralised EU-
     for secondary uses (SO3) infrastructures;              uses of health data;                        infrastructure for secondary use (data access bodies,     infrastructure. The European Health Data Access
                                - No common EU              Guidelines for voluntary participation in   research infrastructures, EMA, ECDC, HERA);               Body (EHDAB) intermediates communication in
                                infrastructure              infrastructure                              -Access to EU held data may be provided by                infrastrucrure, provides access to cross-country
                                                                                                        respective institutions, including through EHDS           registries and EU level data
                                                                                                        infrastructure
                                                                                                        -Implementing/delegated acts
     Data quality (SO3)         No common data quality       Voluntary label                             Mandatory self-declared data quality label,              Certification, setting minimum mandatory
                                standards and labels         Codes of conduct                            describing the location and attributes of datasets       requirements to be listed by Data Access Bodies
                                                                                                         provided by data access bodies; no minimum quality       and enter EHDS for data reuse
                                                                                                         requirements
     Support for AI             Access to health data for    Codes of conduct, in line with Article      Health Data Access Bodies supporting providers on        Same as in Option 2, with an additional obligation
     development and            development of AI            69 of AIA                                   developing AI technologies and regulators on             to structure all health data on the EHDS according
     verification (SO3)         technology based on                                                      verification of AI technologies                          to semantics interoperability requirements
                                separate national legal                                                  DABs collaborate with AIA bodies on data
                                bases                                                                    standardisation for AI in healthcare
     Governance and EU          -Separate governance         Voluntary cooperation network of            Designation of national digital health authorities for   Same as option 2, but an existing EU body/agency
     cooperation (SO2, SO3)     frameworks focused on        national Health Data Access Bodies          access to data at national level; access to cross        coordinates all national bodies and provides access
                                specific initiatives         (Health Data Access Network)                country data: by the DAB where controller is located     to cross country and EU data (European Health
                                -Health Data Access                                                      - Access to EU held data may be provided by              Data Access Body)
                                Bodies in some Member                                                    respective institutions
                                States as national                                                       -EU coordination: expert group on health data access     Option 3+: A new EU body tasked with the
                                governance bodies for                                                    and reuse, data altruism, AI and data quality (Expert    coordination of all national bodies and providing
                                health data reuse                                                        Group on Health Data Reuse)                              access to cross-country and EU data



34
     Secondary use of health data: Jointly with the DGA, the EHDS would establish
     requirements and supervision duties, to ensure the secure and privacy preserving re-use of
     health data through a combination of measures. The legislative proposal will:
               Establish legal safeguards as specific data categories, suitable purposes and general
                conditions for the reuse of health data;
               Establish rules    concerning    data   minimisation,   pseudonymisation,     ethical
                requirements;
               Require the use of secure processing environments when processing (reuse)
                sensitive personal health data, with security gates at entry (e.g. reliable
                identification, authentication and authorisation of users, belonging organisation and
                background); and security gates at exit (e.g. data export, to ensure that no re-
                identifiable data is exported. The pseudonymised data should be processed in the
                secure environment);
     All three policy options are also framed according to the limitations of health data transfers
     and access to/from third countries as in the DGA. Third country stakeholders may access
     data via data access bodies, although a mechanism for identifying the requesters is needed.
     However, given the sensitivity of health data, the Commission could be empowered to
     adopt delegated acts in order to set specific conditions applicable for transfers to third-
     countries for certain non-personal health data categories, as per the DGA. For personal
     health data, the controller would need to take all reasonable technical, legal and
     organisational measures in order to prevent transfers or access to personal data held in the
     EU where appropriate safeguards for the use of data are not provided, and such transfer or
     access would create a conflict with EU law or the law of the relevant Member
     State. Specific standards and specifications could be set out for the security of the
     clouds/infrastructures where health data is being stored. Member States could use article
     9(4) of GDPR for imposing more stringent conditions/restrictions.

     The policy options build upon horizontal and sectorial existing and planned legislative
     frameworks, particularly on the Data Governance Act (DGA), Data Act and the GDPR, as
     explained in the Introduction and Annex 6.

     All three options benefit from a horizontal set of safety and security measures to ensure
     individuals trustworthiness on the European Health Data Space. These measures include:

     5.1       5.1              What is the baseline from which options are assessed?

     The baseline is a “no policy change” scenario. Member States would continue
     implementing Article 14 of the CBHC Directive, supported by the eHealth Network. The
     baseline also takes into account the creation of common European data spaces, through the
     horizontal legislative framework DGA, without specific health provisions. It would also
     include the impact of the Data Act upon its approval which provides for limited
     requirements (mostly for emergency health threat) of the access/sharing of health data
     generated by use of smart, connected products and related services.

     For the exchange of patient data for health care (primary use) this would mean that the
     data exchange would continue between healthcare professionals pursuant to CBHC
     Directive, for specific use cases and on a voluntary basis (via MyHealth@EU
     infrastructure). The work of the eHealth Network would continue to focus mainly EHR-


35
     relevant data domains. Individuals would continue to exercise their rights in relation to
     their health data granted in the GDPR, meaning the right to access their own data under
     Article 15 GDPR and data portability under Article 20 GDPR, where it applies. However,
     due to the limitations due to the fragmented implementation of Article 20 of the GDPR,
     they would not be able to obtain all health data related to them (including medical
     examination results), from all data sources (as some of them may process the data on legal
     bases regarding which the GDPR portability right does not apply), in a digital
     interoperable format. The lack of a requirement of a digital interoperable format would
     continue to make it difficult for citizens and healthcare providers to share data digitally
     with another organisation, perpetuating healthcare system inefficiencies. The COVID
     pandemic showed even stronger the problems related to lack of interoperability and access
     to health data. For instance, in order to deal with the COVID-19 patients moved between
     healthcare providers, the Commission modified the Clinical Patient Management System
     (CPMS) to allow for upload and download of the data. Meanwhile, the COVID-19 crisis
     also accelerated the progress in digitalisation at national level and common work at EU
     level (e.g. EU-Digital COVID Certificates, contact tracing apps, etc.).

     Under the baseline scenario, the rules for the provision of digital health services and
     products, including telemedicine, would remain fragmented. Whilst important investments
     in digital health are foreseen under the Recovery and Resilience Facility (RRF) and
     European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) (around 13 billion), the standards and
     specifications will remain fragmented and the interoperability between countries and at
     national level will remain limited. The lack of interoperability would hamper the free flow
     of health data across the EU.

     For the access to and exchange of health data for research, innovation, public health,
     policy-making, statistics, regulatory activities and other uses like personalised medicine
     (secondary use), access to data would be based on consent of the data subject, which
     remains expensive or Member States would continue to develop their own national
     policies and legislation; however, they would do so in an uncoordinated manner, as this is
     an area that is not properly covered by the CBHC Directive. Member States actions would
     be guided and framed to a certain extent by the proposal for Data Governance Act.
     Thematic or disease specific infrastructures would continue to be developed in an
     uncoordinated and non-interoperable manner undermining the possibility of big data
     analytics. The COVID-19 pandemic also showed the difficulties to obtain quickly reliable
     and comparable data on healthcare for public health and healthcare. However, COVID-19
     pandemic accelerated scientific research efforts in the fight against the SARS-CoV-2 in
     order to produce research results as fast as possible.

     The economic benefit of the baseline includes potential savings for patients due to higher
     uptake of telemedicine (EUR 2,478 billion), potential savings for healthcare providers due
     to more efficient and effective health care services and contributions to the digital health
     single market, and the contribution of health data sharing to R&D and data-driven
     innovation in health research (EUR 1.5 billion in 10 years).

     5.2   5.2               Description of the policy options

     Policy Option 1 consists of soft-law measures, supporting coordination and voluntary
     mechanisms (e.g. guidance) among Member States, and expands the work on
     interoperability of data domains in the Commission Recommendation on a European
     Electronic Health Record exchange format (EEHRxF)clvii from the baseline to cover other



36
     relevant data domains in digital health (e.g. mobile health) and extends the scope to
     secondary uses of health data.

     Policy Option 2 (and 2+) is a medium intensity legislative intervention, moving from the
     purely voluntary scheme of Option 1 to a regulatory framework that establishes a system
     of joint decision-making at European level on requirements on interoperability, security
     and other related aspects on Member States and market operators in the Single Market,
     supported by national implementation. It strengthens the rights of citizens to access and
     control their health data and an EU framework for re-use of health data. The governance
     relies on national bodies brought at EU level in expert groups that would implement and
     enforce nationally EU-level mandatory requirements.

     Policy Option 3 (and 3+) consists of a high intensity legislative intervention, whereby an
     EU body, together with competent national authorities, is tasked with the implementation
     and enforcement of requirements on interoperability and cybersecurity. It also goes beyond
     Option 2 by designating a body at EU level as a European Health Data Access Body
     (EHDAB) for the reuse of health data held by EU bodies and for the coordination of multi-
     country data access requests. Here, option 3 foresees the re-use of an existing body or
     setting up of a new one (option 3+).

     5.2.1 5.2.1        Primary use

     5.2.1.1 5.2.1.1         Individuals’ and health professionals’ access and control over
             health data

     Under Policy Option 1, the strengthened eHealth Network would issue guidance on
     implementing the right of citizens to access and transmit their health data and enable
     access to it. This will include standards and specifications.

     Under Policy Option 2, the right of citizens to control their health data in electronic
     format, irrespective of data holder (public or private), type of data concerned, and data
     source (e.g. EHR systems, mHealth, telehealth, personal health data spaces or other health
     software solutions), will be strengthened. This would mean the rights under GDPR, such
     as access to data,clviii and portability of dataclix between different data sources under the
     GDPR. The right of access would entail immediate electronic access and the portability
     would entail also inferred data (images, test, diagnosis), irrespective of the GDPR legal
     basis for processing. In order to minimise the impact on people with low digital skills,
     access to health data should also be provided on smart phones clx and individuals could also
     request access to data in paper format. Healthcare providers and manufacturers of digital
     health products would be obliged to share health data with user-selected third parties from
     the health/social sector or with other authorities, upon user’s request and could be fined if
     they would not comply. This would be based on the ground of EU law as provided by
     Article 9(2)(h) of the GDPR (processing is necessary for purposes such as medical
     diagnosis, provision of health, treatment or social care services). Applicable mandatory
     interoperability standards and specifications necessary to implement individuals’ rights
     (especially access and portability) would be defined through implementing/delegated acts,
     with the support of the Expert Group on Digital Health. The Public Consultation findings
     show large support for this Policy Option, with 85% support from EU citizens, 94%
     support from industry and 83% support from public authorities.

     Under Policy Option 3, the same rights would be established. As in Policy Option 2, there
     would no distinction between public and private actors when sharing of data between
     healthcare providers. Neither private healthcare providers nor manufacturers would be


37
     allowed to block or restrict the individuals’ rights to access and control their health-related
     data.

     5.2.1.2 5.2.1.2         Scope of data

     Under Policy Option 1, the scope of data covered by the European framework for primary
     use of health data would continue to cover interoperability of data domains in the
     European electronic health record exchange format (EEHRxF) (that is, patient summaries,
     ePrescriptions/eDispensations, laboratory reports, medical images and reports and hospital
     discharge reports), as in the baseline, but it would be extended to cover other data domains
     in the area of digital health, such as the domain of data streams generated by wearable
     health devices, mobile health applications or personal health data storages/data
     intermediation services.

     Under Policy Option 2 and Policy Option 3, the scope of data domains would also be
     extended to other digital health areas beyond the data domains under the EEHRxF, but
     aspects related to security and other quality aspects would also be covered, beyond
     interoperability, in relation to the flows generated by these data domains. These policy
     options would foresee the introduction of additional data domains through delegated acts
     once the standardisation work has advanced. Such data domains could include rare disease
     data for which work has been carried out concerning minimum datasets (for example, in
     the context of the European Reference Networks), genomic data and data streams from
     medical devices and mobile health applications or other types of data, to be defined in
     delegated acts.

     5.2.1.3 5.2.1.3         Quality and interoperability requirements

     Under Policy Option 1, non-compulsory guidelines by the eHealth Network and soft-law
     mechanisms are the main policy tool to advance in the removal of barriers hampering the
     free movement of digital health services and products. These guidelines would codify a
     common EU assessment framework under the strengthened eHealth Network. The scope
     of Commission Recommendation on a European Electronic Health Record exchange
     format (EEHRxF)clxi would be broadened to cover interoperability between EHRs,
     providers of data intermediation services providing electronic health records (as defined in
     the DGA) and other software in health, such as medical devices feeding data into
     electronic health records. The developments should use, as much as possible, international
     standards. A voluntary quality label would aim at assisting procurers of software and
     digital infrastructure in health with their purchase decisions through clear information on
     the level of interoperability, cybersecurity and other key quality aspects, taking into
     account and building upon the existing framework (MDR, AIA, cybersecurity). For
     mobile health products that are not medical devices or are not covered by the AI Act,
     such as wellness applications, a common EU assessment framework would be developed
     by the eHealth Network, building on existing international standardsclxii and another
     voluntary label would be developed to provide transparency to the users.

     Under Policy Option 2, the guidelines would be replaced by common EU minimum
     mandatory requirements for the digital products mentioned above (e.g. EHR systems,
     data intermediation services providing electronic health records, and medical devices that
     can provide data into the electronic health records) that would become binding through
     implementing acts by the Commission, and would be prepared with the support of the
     Expert Group on Digital Health in consultation with relevant bodies (Expert Group on
     Health Data Reuse, competent bodies dealing with cybersecurity, etc.), building on
     existing international standards and taking into account and building upon existing tasks

38
     and legislation (MDR, AIA, etc.). When the requirements touch upon medical devices,
     cooperation with Medical Device Coordination Group may be envisaged. Mandatory
     requirements through a certification scheme granted by third parties was supported by 52%
     of respondents to the Public Consultation, with most support coming from EU citizens
     (61%) and less support from public authorities (47%) and industry (39%). For wellness
     apps not classified as medical devices, the standards and specifications would be
     recommended. Such minimum requirements could include an obligation for market
     operators of such products to implement interoperability requirements and specific
     standards and specifications (e.g. specific Application Programming Interfaces (APIs)),
     building upon the domains of the EEHRxF for interoperability with the digital health
     ecosystem, but also covering other data domains. The requirements, adopted through
     implementing/delegated acts, may cover additional quality aspects, including (cyber)
     security, technical criteria for processing sensitive personal data or data protection. The
     mandatory requirements may be complemented by guidance and/or codes of conduct.

     Compliance with these requirements would be monitored and enforced by national digital
     health authorities or notified bodies (in the case of medical devices) through a mandatory
     label, and would be complemented by an obligation of technology providers to share
     health data with user-selected third parties from the health sector upon user request. Under
     this option, although they would remain self-declared andvoluntary for wellness apps, the
     quality labels would become mandatory for digital products services and products such
     as EHR systems, data intermediation services providing electronic health records or
     medical devices feeding health information domains in the electronic health records, to
     ensure comparability of digital health products and services across the European digital
     single market.

     For post-market surveillance, the enforcement would be done by national digital health
     authorities /market surveillance authorities through ex post measures, such as fines.

     Rules on conditionality of public funding on the respect of EU level standards and
     specifications would be introduced whenever possible, as well as conditions for using the
     standards in procurements. Cross-border provision and reimbursement of such services
     would be done in accordance with rules on social security coordination and cross-border
     healthcare directive. These labels would be supported by a European database of
     certified/labelled products that would allow for verification by consumers, procurers and
     other stakeholders.

     Under Policy Option 2+, most elements would remain like in option 2 (including
     mandatory requirements for EHRs, data intermediation services providing electronic
     health records and medical devices that feed health information domains into EHRs and
     medical devices and voluntary recommended standads for wellness apps), but the
     mandatory label for EHR systems based on a self-declaration would be replaced by a
     third-party certification. For medical devices having information feeding into EHR and
     where the manufacturers claim interoperability with EHR systems, this would in principle
     be part of the performance assessment carried out by notified bodies under MDR. It may
     entail the cooperation with national digital health authorities to support notified bodies
     to check the compliance with these requirements before the device is put on the market.
     This is relevant to medical devices, whose components store/transfer/process data in EHR
     systems (images, laboratory results, structured patient data, for instance related to patient
     summaries, ePrescriptions, discharge reports). Other devices including other types of
     datasets may be added later, once the technical requirements are finalised. For wellness
     applications, no changes would be introduced. An EU database to record the certified and


39
     labelled products and ensure transparency would be set up. Under Policy Option 3, the
     measures to strengthen the digital single market in health would become more stringent.
     The quality labels would be replaced by third party certification schemes and would
     also cover certain wellness applications besides EHR systems and digital health
     products that are medical devices and feed information in electronic health records.
     The criteria for wellness applications within the scope of third-party certification would be
     further clarified in implementing/delegated acts (e.g. applications that, even though not
     pursuing a medical use, process personal data that is relevant for disease prevention or
     monitoring).

     Overall, respondents in the public consultation believed either an authorisation scheme
     managed by national bodies (a mandatory prior approval by a national authority) or a
     certification scheme granted by third parties (a mandatory independent assessment of the
     interoperability level) would be appropriate (respectively 39% and 37%). The option of
     using a voluntary labelling scheme was the least popular (10%). There were some
     differences across stakeholder types. For instance, business associations were the most
     likely type of stakeholders to believe standards and technical requirements should be made
     applicable through a labelling scheme (34%, compared with only 1% of NGOs for
     instance), and the least likely to believe they should be made applicable by authorisation
     scheme (14% only, compared with 42% of NGOs and 47% of public authorities for
     instance).

     5.2.1.4 5.2.1.4         Cross-border health data sharing

     Under Policy Option 1, MyHealth@EU would remain a voluntary infrastructure,
     which is expanded to new services (laboratory results, medical images, discharge
     letters) and provides services enabling citizens to access their translated patient data.
     The identification of patients and health professionals would be based on the European
     Digital Identity Framework. In order to provide more specific instructions on its
     application in healthcare, the strengthened eHealth Network will develop voluntary
     guidelines for the use of eID by patients at points of care or in pharmacies, and for the
     identification of health professionals. In addition, it would provide guidelines on the
     interoperability of healthcare professionals’ registries.

     Under Policy Option 2, MyHealth@EU becomes a mandatory infrastructure to cover
     all Member States, which would need to implement basic cross-border digital health
     services, covering the data sets as per above. It would also be expanded to provide access
     for citizens to data in the language of the country of destination and other services in
     relation to telehealth, mHealth, vaccination card etc. The target would be that
     MyHealth@EU could cover all accredited healthcare providers. The Public Consultation
     shows varying support for an EU infrastructure, with 71% support from EU citizens, 67%
     from industry and 43% from public authorities. The architecture for the implementation of
     specific services would be set out in implementing acts. Additional services, including
     advanced cross-border digital health services, or ways of implementing data access and
     sharing at national and cross-border level may be developed through implementing and
     delegated acts.

     The identification of patients and health professionals would also be based on the
     European Digital Identity Framework. The Expert Group for Digital Health would
     contribute to the development of additional requirements and a minimum level of
     security for the electronic identification of health professionals. Additional compulsory
     requirements to accept eID for patient identification in points of care would be
     developed, building on the European Digital Identity Framework. There could also be

40
     voluntary cross-border digital services enabling the interoperability and mutual
     recognition of health professionals’ registries.

     Under Policy Option 3, the same applies as under Policy Option 2, but would be
     complemented with a mandatory cross-border digital service ensuring the
     interoperability and mutual recognition of health professionals’ registries.

     5.2.1.5 5.2.1.5          National governance and EU cooperation

     Under Policy Option 1, Member States would be required to designate national digital
     health authorities. These bodies would convene at EU level in a compulsory eHealth
     Network, to which membership would be mandatory for all Member States. The Network
     will continue to issue guidelines and decision-making processes remain at national level.
     Collaboration with stakeholders, particularly health care professionals, would be sought as
     relevant, to strengthen co-creation of solutions.

     Under Policy Option 2, at national level, Member States would be required to designate a
     national digital health authorities, supporting the implementation of the tasks below
     (individuals’ access to health data and sharing/providing access to the data to healthcare
     providers of their choice; implementation of standards, specifications and labels).
     Currently, such authorities exist in all the Member States and have tasks related to
     digitalisation, legislation on interoperability and standards etc.clxiii Collaboration with Data
     Protection Authorities should be sought, to ensure treatment of non implementation of
     rights of individuals. Also, collaboration with notified bodies, cybersecurity authorities is
     necessary, especially for labels/certification. At EU level, these bodies would be brought
     into an expert group - the Expert Group on Digital Health, consisting of experts from
     national digital health authorities, which could be part of a wider governance body that
     would include secondary use of health data. The expert group (and its subgroups) would
     contribute to preparing the technical standards and specifications that would be adopted as
     implementing and delegated acts through comitology procedures. These standards and
     specifications would be implemented nationally by the digital health authorities, including
     through labels/certification. Additional services and ways of implementing data access and
     sharing at national and cross-border level (including through infrastructures, apps etc.)
     may be developed through implementing and delegated acts. The Expert Group on Digital
     Health would collaborate with the Expert Group on Health Data Reuse (5.2.1.3). Similar
     involvement of stakeholders as for Policy Option 1.

     Under Policy Option 3, an EU body (European Digital Health Body) would be tasked with
     the implementation/enforcement of EU-wide requirements. Such body could be an existing
     one or a new one. The representatives of national digital health authorities would be
     brought at EU level for the supervision of such EU body. The European Digital Health
     Body would be in charge of the implementation of measures to ensure the fulfilment of
     requirements on interoperability and cybersecurity.

     In all options, governance mechanisms for primary and secondary uses would collaborate
     closely on issues relating to data use.




41
     5.2.2 5.2.2        Secondary use

     5.2.2.1 5.2.2.1       Reusers’ access to health data (including researchers, innovators,
             policy-makers, regulators, but also healthcare providers for treating similar
             patients)

     Under Policy Option 1, the European governance framework would provide guidelines on
     the reuse of health data, with Member States being free to implement separate laws for
     processing of health data or continue to process it based on consent.

     Under Policy Option 2 and Policy Option 3, EHDS framework would provide a common
     European legal basis establishing the purposes of processing for health data reuse by third
     parties, with no distinction between public or private reusers or data holders, based on
     public interest, statistics or scientific research, alongside with the provision of the GDPR
     on the processing of health data based on consent. The secure provision of health data by
     Health Data Access Bodies, or other similarly empowered bodiesclxiv, would take place on
     the basis of such common EU legal basis, as possible in the GDPR on grounds of:

        a) processing is necessary for reasons of substantial public interest, on the basis of
           Union or Member State law which shall be proportionate to the aim pursued,
           respect the essence of the right to data protection and provide for suitable and
           specific measures to safeguard the fundamental rights and the interests of the data
           subject (Article 9(2)(g) of the GDPR);
        b) processing is necessary for the purposes of preventive or occupational medicine,
           for the assessment of the working capacity of the employee, medical diagnosis, the
           provision of health or social care or treatment or the management of health or
           social care systems and services on the basis of Union or Member State law or
           pursuant to contract with a health professional and subject to the conditions and
           safeguards referred to in paragraph 3 (Article 9(2)(h) of the GDPR);
        c) public interest in the area of public health such as the protecting against serious
           cross-border threats to health, ensuring high standards of quality and safety of
           health care and of medicinal products or medical devices (Article 9(2)(i) of the
           GDPR);
        d) archiving purposes in the public interest, or scientific or historical research
           purposes (Article 9(2)(j) of the GDPR).

     Such legal basis would include specific purposes such as scientific research, development
     and innovation activities, national and European policy making and regulatory activities,
     safety of medicinal products and medical devices, combating health threats, knowledge
     management, steering and supervision of healthcare by authorities, planning and reporting
     activities, national and European statistics, education, information to healthcare
     professionals concerning the condition of similar patients, in order to treat another patient
     (e.g. for personalised medicine, identify genomic mutations that provoke certain diseases,
     rare diseases symptoms and treatments etc.). It would ensure that the same conditions
     apply throughout the EU, including common minimum requirements and safeguards (e.g.
     the lawful purposes of reuse, ethical and data protection safeguards, security measures,
     contractual commitments). It would not allow the use of data for purposes, such as
     marketing towards healthcare providers/professionals or change of insurance premiums for
     a person or group of persons.

     As safeguards for processing, the conditions would mention the approval of requests for
     accessing the data by data access body, as well as processing in secure environments. In
     exceptional cases (e.g. data from one data holder), the access can be granted by the data

42
     holder respecting the conditions set out in the EHDS legislation and provided that the data
     is processed in a secure environment.

     Policy Option 2 and Option 3 would enforce the compulsory access to and possibility of
     sharing of health data via Health Data Access Bodies. The provisions of the Data
     Governance Act on this domain would provide the technical support for the
     implementation of this requirement. However, the data access bodies would decide on
     each request, upon criteria established in EHDS law. While the processing of data would
     not be based on the consent of the data subjects, the policy option 2 and 3 would establish
     the safeguards that allow a high level of trust and security for the secondary use of data.
     For instance: data can only be processed for the purpose set in the law and it would be
     illegal to use the information against the data subject – for insurance, publicity etc; the data
     can be processed under EHDS framework only if the data access body provides a permit,
     taking into account the application submitted by the user and provided that the request
     meets the criteria set out in EHDS legislation; the data can only be processed in a secure
     environment, where the applicant has at its disposal the necessary IT tools; the data is
     pseudonymised by the data access body and the applicant does not have the decryption
     key. A compensation mechanism could also be implemented in order to determine a
     reasonable fee for the work of data access bodies and for the data holders in order to
     compensate them for the costs of access to the datasets held by them.

     5.2.2.2 5.2.2.2          Data altruism

     Under Policy Option 1, only the mechanisms for data altruism set up under the proposal
     for a DGA would apply and there would be no sector specific measures.

     Under Policy Option 2, as lex specialis to the proposal for a Data Governance Act (DGA)
     and in compliance with GDPR requirements, data altruism is an opt-in system where
     individuals need to formally express their consent, being an active system, which requires
     the participation of the individual. Where data altruism is managed in the health sector by
     non-for profit/non-public entities, these would be supervised by the Health Data Access
     Bodies, in cooperation with bodies established under the DGA. Moreover, given the
     sensitivity of health data, specific additional requirements may be added through
     implementing/delegated acts under EHDS, to avoid fragmentation (e.g. processing in
     secure environments that need to comply with the standards and specifications set out at
     EU level). Where some categories of data have been processed based on consent according
     to national law, their further processing can be done using the EHDS mechanisms, without
     an additional consent being necessary. Given the absence of explicit consent of individual
     in such case, the data access body would monitor the implementation of such mechanism
     and ensure a strong protection of the rights and freedoms of the affected individual by
     implementing strong organisational and security safeguards.

     Policy Option 3 would be the same as Option 2.

     5.2.2.3 5.2.2.3          Types of data in scope for reuse

     Under Policy Option 1, there would be guidelines on types of health-related data that
     could be made available for secondary use and on common modalities to facilitate access
     to health data for secondary use would be adopted by the EU network on secondary use of
     health data. This option also foresees guidelines concerning the provision for reuse (for
     free or against a nominal fee, covering the costs) of data that has been obtained in the
     framework of EHDS and has subsequently been enriched (e.g. annotated).



43
     Under Policy option 2, the legislative framework would define the categories of health
     data that would be made accessible for secondary use in the EHDS and by Health Data
     Access Bodies. Available data could cover electronic health records, genomic data,
     administrative data, health research data, statistical data, claims/insurance data, relevant
     social data and other health-related data (from both public and private data
     holders/healthcare providers), data from disease registries and networks of registries. The
     data, including raw data or statistical data, obtained through public funding (national or
     EU), such as data from registries or research projects should be made available for reuse
     for free or against a nominal fee covering costs to make this data available. This option
     also foresees an obligation that data that has been obtained in the framework of EHDS and
     has been enriched by the user (e.g. annotated) is to be provided for reuse for free or against
     a nominal fee, covering the costs. Other data covered and managed by Data Access Bodies
     also include the data obtained from entreprises under the Data Act.
     Policy Option 3 is the same as Policy Option 2.

     5.2.2.4 5.2.2.4         Digital infrastructure for secondary uses

     Under Policy Option 1, the EHDS infrastructure ecosystem would extend the current
     service for cross-border sharing of patients’ data (MyHealth@EU) to secondary uses
     of health data. The participation in the infrastructure would be voluntary. Each Member
     State may designate a national Health Data Access Body that would be connected to the
     infrastructure. Other EU bodies may also be connected to this infrastructure (such as the
     EMA, ECDC, HERA, etc.). Guidelines will set out the criteria for voluntary participation
     Also research infrastructures may connect to the EHDS infrastructure for secondary use of
     health data. The infrastructure, built as a peer-to-peer network, would offer the
     necessary means to know what institutions are connected, what data are available, and to
     allow the communication between the nodes of the infrastructure. The data consumer
     would need to submit a data access/permit application to each country’s access body and
     the different parties of the infrastructure will support access based on voluntary guidelines.

     Under Policy Option 2, the participation in a Union-wide infrastructure for reuse of health
     data would be mandatory. The EHDS infrastructure ecosystem would be enhanced with
     new capabilities for secondary use of health data, based on a decentralised architecture
     (i.e. peer to peer network topology). Each Member State will need to designate a
     National Health Data Access Body that would be connected to the infrastructure.
     Criteria would be set out in the legislation for authorising the participation in the
     infrastructure by other stakeholders (e.g. research infrastructures, EMA, ECDC, European
     Health Emergency Preparedness and Response Authority (HERA)). The data consumer
     would have information about datasources through an EU catalogue of data and would
     submit only one application that is delivered to all nodes identified in the application. The
     approval of a data request remains an autonomous decision from each Health Data Access
     Body. EU institutions and agencies would provide access to relevant data they are holding,
     including through the infrastructure for secondary use of health data. Due to the highly
     technical nature of this infrastructure, Implementing and Delegated Acts would be
     envisaged to detail information about the infrastructure and its architecture, what and
     how data will be searched/accessed/exchanged, how interoperability and security will be
     achieved, as well as for additional services. In addition to services mentioned under Option
     1, Option 2 could also support, as part of the central services, some secure environment
     services for pulling and analysis of data (e.g. by the Commission or by an IT provider
     for the Commission). Additional services and ways of accessing data may be set out in
     implementing/delegated acts.



44
     Under Policy Option 3, as in Option 2, participation would be mandatory. However, the
     infrastructure would be based on a centralised architecture (i.e. star network topology).
     Under this infrastructure, a European Health Data Access Body (EHDAB) would act
     and work as an orchestrator, intermediating the communications between all
     participants in the infrastructure. Multi-country application requests would be
     submitted through the EHDAB. The data consumer will only need to submit one
     application. EHDAB would articulate with the necessary Health Data Access Bodies and
     the EHDAB’s access would include all underlying approvals and rejections from each
     Health Data Access Body. One option is that all multi-country data analysis would need to
     be performed in the EHDAB’s secure environment services. In addition, the EHDAB
     would host and provide access to transnational registries. Only certified partners
     would be able to join the infrastructure and EDHAB would orchestrate the
     implementation of the certification mechanism.

     For all options, the request from data consumer must reach the relevant Health Data
     Access Body and, therefore, there is the need for an agreement on how an application
     process should look like. Without it, a data consumer may face a different process in each
     access body. For all options, there would be the need for central IT services to support the
     infrastructure. The type and range of IT services being provided at central level varies
     according to the policy option.

     5.2.2.5 5.2.2.5         Data quality

     Under Policy Option 1, voluntary data quality label would help to evaluate, according to
     a common data quality assessment framework, the quality of data (data source). The
     common assessment framework would be jointly prepared by the network dealing with
     primary and secondary use of health data, considering the interrelation between primary
     and secondary uses of health data regarding data quality, in collaboration with relevant
     stakeholders.

     Under Policy Option 2, self-declared mandatory data quality label would ensure the
     evaluation, according to a common data quality assessment framework, of the quality of
     data (data source). The data quality assessment framework would provide transparency
     for data consumers and data access bodies about the quality of the data at source, without
     setting minimum data quality requirements for the data to be accessed by Data Access
     Bodies and would support reaching certain data-related requirements from AIA such as
     annotation, labelling, prevention of bias and avoidance of error. The framework would
     be jointly prepared by the Expert Group on Health Data Reuse and the Expert
     Group on Digital Health in collaboration with other relevant bodies, such as the ones in
     the AIA, and implemented through Implementing/Delegated acts and labels, to facilitate
     the reuse of health data. Pre-prepared data packages, provided by data access bodies, could
     support reserachers and innovators. The Public Consultation findings show there is varied
     support for a data quality label, with 41% support from industry and 30% support from
     public authorities.

     Under Policy Option 3, mandatory data quality certification to ensure that only datasets
     that fulfil minimum mandatory data quality requirements are made available in the EHDS.
     These data quality certification would be prepared by an existing institution or agency
     would act as a European Health Data Access Body, in collaboration with the European
     Body for Digital Health, supporting the Commission adopting rules (through
     implementing/delegated acts) to facilitate the reuse of health data. EDHAB can orchestrate
     the implementation of the certification mechanism.Under option 3+, a new institution
     would fulfil these functions.

45
     5.2.2.6 5.2.2.6         Support for artificial intelligence development and verification

     An appropriate use of data plays a fundamental role in ensuring the trustworthiness and
     creating trust in AI systems. The representativeness and quality of data used for training,
     validation and testing of AI applications that rely on machine learning could have an
     important impact on the resulting algorithm’s performance including, with regard to
     reducing bias and ensuring that the datasets are representative for Europe. The EHDS
     should be coherent with the Regulation on AIA.

     Under Policy Option 1, codes of conduct, in line with Article 69 of AIA would be drawn
     up by individual manufacturers or by organisations representing them (or by both) on
     quality criteria for data used in development of AI in healthcare. The quality and
     representativeness of a data set always needs to be assessed in view of the purpose that it
     will be used for and each developer of AI systems needs to ensure that training, validation
     and testing data sets meet the appropriate quality criteria referred to in the AIA.

     Under Policy Option 2, standards and/or common specifications would be adopted under
     the AIA to indicate how the essential requirements under the AI Act for health data could
     be fulfilled. In this regard, the Health Data Access Bodies, in addition to bodies under
     the AI Act, would aid in developing such standards/common specifications.
     Additionally, Health Data Access Bodies, along with Testing and Experimentation
     Facilities and regulatory sandboxes as foreseen under the AIA, would aid in the
     implementation of the AIA. The EHDS, including through the infrastructure for secondary
     uses, will provide high quality data for training, validation and testing of AI systems.
     Moreover, it would aid regulators in terms of data to scrutinise AI algorithms (e.g. control
     datasets, labelling, annotation, synthetic data etc.). Following the adoption of such data
     standards/common specifications, suitable information would be provided on data used in
     the EHDS infrastructure to support developers and other interested parties (e.g. regulators)
     in assessing the appropriateness of those data for the development/compliance checks of
     AI systems. One way to facilitate this is the development of common data catalogues
     and/or labelling of data in a uniform manner and/or other systems to provide this
     information in a clear, concise and comprehensive manner to researchers, developers,
     start-ups etc., but also control datasets.

     Policy Option 3 strengthens Policy Option 2 with an obligation to structure all health
     data on the EHDS according to semantic interoperability requirements. Health Data
     Access Bodies would ensure that data on the EHDS fulfil these requirements.

     5.2.2.7 5.2.2.7         Governance and EU cooperation

     Under Policy Option 1, there would be no specific sectoral governance mechanism
     established at national level other than what is indicated in the DGA (i.e. a single point of
     information and a support function for public bodies). Member States would be
     encouraged to task national bodies to have a role in facilitating access to health data for
     secondary use. In parallel to the eHealth Network established on primary use of health
     data, a voluntary network on secondary use of health data would be established with
     relevant representatives from Member States to promote cooperation and guidance on this
     distinct topic.
     Under Policy Option 2, all Member States would be required to ensure that there is a
     national body entrusted with decision-making powers and tasks in relation to health data
     access by third parties for secondary use. These Health Data Access Bodies would have as
     primary functions to: (a) handle requests for access to health data from different sources


46
     and act as a data controller (as specified in national law); (b) to grant a licence/permit for
     access when conditions set out in the basic act are met and to provide the secure physical
     infrastructure to enable access to health data for secondary purposes, including for the
     training and testing of AI algorithms. The tasks of these bodies and modalities for
     granting access would be harmonised. Access to cross-country registries will be
     provided by the Health Data Access Body of the country where the controller is located.
     The Health Data Access Bodies designated in all Member States would support
     manufacturers to datasets to train AI algorithms. It would support public institutions,
     including EMA, ECDC and HERA, as well as private entities, to have access to health data
     in a secure and trusted way. They could also support the notified bodies, Testing and
     Experimentation Facilities under the Digital Europe Programme and medicine agencies
     with controlled datasets for testing the AI algorithms. These bodies would also be involved
     in defining the quality framework for labels on data quality. An EU expert group to the
     Commission (Expert Group on Health Data Reuse), which could be part of a bigger
     body, entailing also the primary use of health data, would support the Commission in
     adopting further rules (through Implementing/ Delegated legislation) to facilitate the
     secondary use of health data, would be created. It would also be involved in defining the
     rules for the infrastructure on secondary use of health data, including with regards to
     security rules for the secure processing environments. It would also contribute to defining
     the rules on data quality, in collaboration with relevant stakeholders from respective fields.
     Various stakeholders participating in EHDS, such as researchers or industry would also
     collaborate with the EU expert group, as well as civil society and patients’ organisations.
     Collaboration and/or representation in European Data Innovation Board (under DGA)
     would be ensured. Health Data Access Bodies could serve both EU and international data
     users (under the condition that the data is being processed on the secure data space of the
     DAB). The Public Consultation findings show there is great support for EU coordination
     of national bodies dealing with secondary use of health data, with 73% support from EU
     citizens, 75% from industry and 59% from public authorities.

     Under Policy Option 3, going further than Option 2, an existing EU regulatory body or
     agency could be tasked to act as a European Data Access Body (EHDAB) to grant
     access to health data held in transnational databases and registries (under the same
     conditions than those applying for Health Data Access Bodies). This would also
     coordinate the work of the national Health Data Access Bodies. In the context of cross-
     border research, it would facilitate cross-border access to health data held by national
     Health Data Access Bodies or by other infrastructures participating in the EHDS
     infrastructure (e.g. by centralising requests for cross-border research and coordinating the
     approval process with national authorities, issuing guidance on data access forms and data
     access agreement templates, etc.). Under option 3+, a new institution would fulfil these
     functions and would support the work on secondary use of health data.

     In all options, governance mechanisms for primary and secondary uses would collaborate
     closely on issues relating to data use.

     5.2.3 5.2.3        Stakeholders’ views on different Policy Options

     There is overall widespread support for the different policy options (particularly policy
     Options 2 and 3), perceived from the outcomes of the Public Consultation on stakeholder
     views.

     On primary use, there is large support for the strengthening of patients’ rights to control
     their health data in an electronic format. 88% of respondents think EHDS should promote
     citizens’ control over their own health data, including access to health data and

47
     transmission of their health data in electronic format. 83% of respondents say that EHDS
     whould facilitate delivery of healthcare for citizens across borders. 84% of respondents say
     that citizens should have the right to transmit one’s health data in electronic format to
     another professional or entity of their choice and 82% feel that they should have the right
     to request public healthcare providers to share electronically one's health data with other
     healthcare providers/entities of one's choice. 72% of the respondents support accessing
     one’s health data that is exchanged between health professionals or with other entities via a
     digital infrastructure and 69% support this exchange to take place via an EU electronic
     infrastructure. 77% of respondents said it would be useful if citizens were able to transmit
     the data from mHealth and telehealth into their electronic health records. Respondents
     believed a certification scheme granted by third parties (a mandatory independent
     assessment of the interoperability level) would be most appropriate to foster the uptake of
     digital health producrs and services (52% support).On secondary use, 89% of respondents
     said that EHDS should support and accelerate research in health. There is support from
     55% of respondents for the mandatory appointment of a national body that authorises
     access to health data by third parties to facilitate access to health data for research,
     innovation, policy-making and regulatory decisions.

     The two options that respondents said were most appropriate in facilitating access to health
     data held by private stakeholders was to have access to health data granted by a national
     body (rather than by the data holder), either subject to the agreement of data subjects (most
     support from industry (57%), least support from public authorities (24%), or in accordance
     with national law (most support from public authorities (65%), least support from industry
     (21%)). Only a small proportion of respondents said a fee would facilitate the sharing of
     health data held by private stakeholders (20%), while many highlighted the limitations of
     using this incentive (e.g. difficult to manage, not stimulating enough to share data etc.) and
     a few said it would have a negative impact (e.g. potentially endangering patient interest by
     commercialising health data). Many respondents said that other types of incentives would
     facilitate the sharing of health data held by private stakeholders, such as: legal/mandatory
     obligations, and greater interoperability between systems, databases and registries or a
     more transparent system for sharing data.

     A large majority of respondents said an EU body could facilitate access to health data for
     research, innovation, policy making and regulatory decisions if it had a number of
     functions, the most important ones being: setting standards on interoperability together
     with national bodies dealing with secondary use of health data (87% support); bringing
     together the national bodies dealing with secondary use of health data, for decisions in this
     area (79% support); and facilitating cross-border queries to locate relevant datasets in
     collaboration with national bodies dealing with secondary use of health data (78%
     support).

     Overall, 67% of respondents believed the mandatory use of specific technical requirements
     and standards would be most useful to address interoperability and data quality issues for
     facilitating cross-border access to health data for research, innovation, policy-making and
     regulatory decision, which is in line with the policy options.

     Also in line with the policy options, 65% of respondents recommended allowing access to
     health data by AI manufacturers for the development and testing of AI systems in a secure
     way (including compliance with GDPR rules), by bodies established within the EHDS, to
     facilitate the sharing and use of data sets for the development and testing of AI in
     healthcare. For more information on stakeholders’ views and different positions, please
     consult Annex 2.


48
     6     6                     WHAT ARE THE IMPACTS OF THE POLICY OPTIONS?

     6.1       6.1               Economic impactclxv

     6.1.1 6.1.1           Baseline scenario

     With regard to the costs of governance for primary use of health data, the baseline
     would see a continuation of current efforts in the eHealth Network. These efforts are
     supported and funded partially through Joint Actions, with an approximate cost of EUR 16
     million over ten years. The total cost over 10 years for this governance framework,
     including potentially two joint actions, is expected to be approximately EUR 20 million,
     for the Commission and the Member Statesclxvi.

     With the current voluntary framework, there is no clear prospect for the completion of
     MyHealth@EU in terms of full geographical coverage of the EU/EEA, full deployment of
     data exchange services and use of common electronic identification clxvii. Although the
     deployment of the National Contact Points for eHealth (NCPeHs) could be completed
     across 27 EU Member States, Norway and Iceland by 2027, based on the estimates from
     Member States, less than two thirds are expected to deploy the full portfolio of data
     exchange services. The costs for the partial completion of MyHealth@EU, including
     investments and maintenance costs over 10 years, range between EUR 165-414
     millionclxviii (assuming a costs per service between EUR 0.3-2.5 million).

     At national level, depending on the existing degree of digitalisation and willingness to
     invest in this area, the effort to support national digitalisation and introduce nationally the
     digital services for the exchange of data domains in the EEHRxF could vary between EUR
     3-9 billion. However, around half of Member States already have systems allowing to
     share patients’ data between healthcare providers, whilst several others are in the process
     of strengthening the level of digitalisation supported by national and EU funds. For
     instance, under the Multi-annual Financial Framework 2014-2020, around EUR 1 billion
     were allocated for digital health from the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF)
     and almost EUR 12 billion have been negotiated by the Commission and Member States
     under Recovery and Resilience Facility (RRF) in this area. Therefore, the EU funding is
     expected to cover most (if not fully) the national effort for digitalisation that would be
     needed to support patients’ control over their own health data. However, without clear
     efforts on standardisation and interoperability at EU level, these digitalisation efforts
     risk perpetuating the fragmented landscape that currently exists.

     The benefits of automatic data sharing could lead to a direct financial impact is as high as
     15% of hospital expenditureclxix, stemming from avoidance of costs associated with
     paper data capture, and minimisation of errors that occur from transcription of information.
     It can also have overall positive effects on healthcare expenditure. For instance, during the
     financial crisis years, digitalisation was one of the main actions taken for the countries in
     crisis (although the positive effect is difficult to demonstrate systematically, as the
     digitalisation of health and social care was part of the policy mix applied during the
     financial crisis in countries like Greece, Portugal, Romania that contributed to important
     savings and positive effects, but was not monitored separately).

     For instance, according to experts knowledgeable of the digital transformation of healthcare in Portugal, the
     project of ePrescriptions is estimated to have cost about EUR 8 mil (EUR 2 million investment in 2013-
     2015, and an annual maintenance cost of about EUR 1 mil/year during 2016-2020. The cost recovery for the
     project was in 2 years after roll-out, the following years entailing benefits (billing costs, changes in
     prescription patterns etc). If Portugal had not done this project, it would have lost EUR 20 mil euros (EUR 5



49
     mil/year for 2017-2020) (cost of not doing the project) and many other intangible savings (e.g. fraud
     prevention, but also winning fraud cases in court, inducement of better prescription paterns with associated
     healthcare gains etc). Overall, it was estimated that an annual investment/maintenance of about EUR 30-45
     mil/year, Portugal created savings (on top of costs) for the NHS of over EUR 20 mil/year just in IT costs,
     billing and efficiencies in management (recovery of debts, better vaccination management, better
     procurement of medicinal products etc.). One could estimate that, between 2012-2020, the benefits may have
     reached EUR 160 mil (EUR 20 mil x8years (2013-2020) as direct financial benefits, for instance via
     nationwide available allergy records, interoperable with nationwide ePrescription and not counting
     harmonising practices, better control, error avoidance.

     Overall, regarding the benefits for primary use of data, it is expected that the economic
     impact stemming from potential savings for patients due to higher use of telemedicine,
     more efficient and effective healthcare systems and contribution to the digital health single
     market would amount to EUR 2.5 billion. To this, one could add the cost of not
     duplicating tests. Ensuring interoperability at national level could contribute to reduce
     duplicated medical imaging, which is estimated at EUR 14 billionclxx in the EU over ten
     years (calculated as 10% average of duplicated tests for a total of EUR 14 billion per year
     for examinations requiring Computed Tomography, Magnetic Resonance Imaging and
     PET scans). It is estimated that MyHealth@EU, in the cross-border context, could result
     in EUR 1.9-2.8 billion in savings through the services of electronic cross-border
     prescriptions (corresponding to EUR 37-52 million additional dispensations over 10
     years)clxxi and could save additional EUR 19-75 million through the exchange of medical
     images alone. For ePrescriptions, the estimate is based on the evaluation of the CBHC
     Directive, indicating that around 7.8 million cross-border prescriptions are presented for
     dispensation per year in EU, with an approximate non-dispensation rate of 46%, down
     from 55% in 2012. The lower bound assumes a 10% yearly growth in cross-border
     prescriptions, while the upper bound assumes a 20% yearly growth. This is expected to be
     a conservative estimate, given that the growth between 2012-2021 was estimated at 400%.
     Such benefits would recoup to a large extent the investments that would be made to set up
     MyHealth@EU.

     Regarding secondary uses of health data, some Member States would establish national
     Health Data Access Bodiesclxxii to address the specific needs of health data access without
     a common European framework in health (the baseline assumes 16 data access bodies to
     be operational within 10 years, buidling upon the existing ones). The costs could vary
     greatly depending on national choices, e.g. whether to designate an existing body with the
     functions of health access bodies or whether to create an independent body such as the
     French Health Data Hub or Findata, but it is estimated that the establishment and
     functioning costs (for personnel) range between EUR 33 and 117 million over 10 years
     (assuming a 4 FTE team per Member State as a lower bound, and a combination of
     organisational arrangements across the EU -ranging between 4-FTE and 50-FTE entities,
     for the upper bound). In addition, there would be costs estimated at EUR 445 million for
     the set-up and maintenance of secure environments for data processing as infrastructure,
     which are included already in the framework of Article 7 bodies of the Data Governance
     Act (considers, as per the Data Governance Act, a set up cost of EUR 10.6 million and a
     maintenance cost of EUR 0.6 million yearly). The costs of data altruism authorisation
     framework would be aligned with Data Governance Actclxxiii. Should access to health data
     continue to be organised under the current fragmented framework, the overall costs
     incurred by data re-users in health for cross-country researches could reach at least EUR
     2.7 billion over 10 years, steming mainly from costs related to getting the consent as
     opposed to paying a fee to data access body (this estimate is calculated based on the
     monetary costs incurred by researchers or research institutions to gather the consent of
     data subjects (assuming 30 min required for contacting and getting the consent of the data
     subjects. The cost depends on the size of the cohort).

50
     For secondary use of health data, the benefits, registerd in the value of health data could
     increase from the estimated EUR 25 billion to EUR 43 billion in 2028 (based on the
     baseline of the impact assessment of the Data Governance Act - EUR 306 billion as
     overall value of data in 2020, its growth by 2028 - EUR 533 billion- and the share of
     health in the overall value of data as proportional to the EU’s health expenditure share of
     the GDP- 8.3%). The investments in data access bodies could be recuperated, at least
     partially, through the fees charged by these bodies. Assuming a yearly growth of 5% in
     requests, it is estimated that these fees could amount to EUR 92-166 million (based on
     Findata prices, for more details, see Annex 5). The reuse of health data in the existing
     framework could yield additional EUR 0.8 billion in savings through information
     transparency for policy-makers and regulators, with initiatives such as the Data
     Analysis and Real World Interrogation Network (DARWIN) led by the EMA supporting
     regulators’ to health dataclxxivclxxv and contributing to more efficient regulatory and policy-
     making processes and improved negotiation power.

     The economic contribution of the framework under Article 14 of the CBHC
     Directive, to the growth of the single market for digital health, as shown by the evaluation
     of this Article, is expected to be limited beyond MyHealth@EU, given that it does not
     include specific actions targeting the single market for digital health products and services.
     On secondary use of health data, as shown by the evaluation of the directive, the actions
     taken under the eHealth Network are expected to be limited, even though the Joint Action
     TEHDaS is expected to provide a form of cooperation. The DGA foresees a support to
     data holders through Article 7 bodies of DGA, which can also provide a secure processing
     environment. However, it is difficult to separate the impact of DGA from the impact of
     national law in countries that set up a data access body and it is not clear what the impact
     of DGA would be in the absence of a mandate to provide access to health data.

     6.1.2 6.1.2        Policy Option 1

     6.1.2.1 6.1.2.1         Impact of actions on primary uses of health data

     This policy option is expected to have a limited economic impact, modestly above the
     baseline, given the voluntary nature of the considered actions. At the same time, this
     policy option does not provide a strong incentive to overcome the fragmentation of the
     internal market for digital health products and services, nor the competitiveness of the EU
     digital health sector. However, there is potential for savings from using telehealth services
     (more cost-effective)clxxvi, as well as for a reduction of duplications and errors, direct time
     savings across healthcare systems, reduced hospitalisation or deterioration of health
     stemming from continuous monitoring of some patients, as well as a more efficient
     functioning of the single market for digital health services and products in the EU. The
     efficiency gains in healthcare are expected to result in savings for partients and
     healthcare providers with a net present value of EUR 0.4 billion within the first 10
     years (this amount is expected to be relatively small, only 1% above the baseline, given
     that Option 1 continues with a voluntary framework, as in the baseline).
     In Policy Option 1, the governance framework will continue to be based on a network of
     Member States’ authorities, including digital health authorities, which would make
     decisions to build and strengthen current systems for accessing and sharing health data for
     healthcare delivery purposes. Given the new areas of cooperation, more meetings would be
     necessary (as it was the case during COVID-19 crisis), generating potential additional
     costs (participation in meetings, mostly online, but also travel, accommodation for some
     physical meetings during the year, etc.). These costs, estimated at EUR 8 million above the
     baseline, are expected to be borne by the Commission and Member States (for the


51
     Commission and Member States, taking as a reference the current costs for the eHealth
     Network and the potential physical and virtual meeting needs for the upcoming 10 years).
     Member States will be able to develop and deploy their national and cross-border digital
     infrastructures on a voluntary basis, including those linked to electronic identification in
     health, in a similar way to the baseline, and the services under MyHealth@EU would be
     extended to provide services to citizens. The strengthened mandate of the eHealth Network
     on the cross-border exchange of health falling within the scope of the EEHRxF is expected
     to promote the gradual completion of MyHealth@EU, but requiring at least 10 additional
     years. The investment requirements and maintenance costs for Member States and the
     Commission for MyHealth@EU are estimated at EUR 38-106 million above the
     baseline over 10 years. A faster deployment of MyHealth@EU would also yield
     additional savings for patients and healthcare systems, estimated at EUR 89-115 million,
     thanks to a reduction on the non-dispensation rate of cross-border prescriptions.
     The costs for the implementation (already included in the costs of governance) and
     adoption of voluntary quality labels for digital health products (e.g. EHR systems,
     personal health data storages, mHealth products falling under MDR), and mHealth
     products not falling under MDR (e.g. wellness apps), based on a self-declaration, are
     expected to be relatively limited, between EUR 42 and 227 million. This includes the cost
     for internal preparations by manufacturers for the self-declaration, but not the costs of
     adaptation of existing products. The costs for labels are between EUR 9,000-32,000. The
     volume of EHRs labelled, about 1,840-3,000 over 10 years, for digital health products
     labelled, 1,400-2,800 and for wellness apps labelled, 1,200-2,200 over 10 years. It is
     assumed that labels will have to be renewed after 5 years. Moreover, given the low costs of
     self-declaration in combination with measures on reimbursement and compensation, it is
     expected that the volume of labelled applications will increase steadily across the EU and
     will provide further incentives for digital health developers and market operators to adopt
     interoperable formats and to support control of patients over their data. This is expected to
     contribute to a faster growth of the digital health market (5% to 10% per year), both at the
     EU and Member State level.
     6.1.2.2 6.1.2.2         Impact of actions on secondary uses of health data

     A voluntary basis intervention on secondary use of health data matters is expected to result
     in an economic impact of EUR 2.8 billion in total, over 10 years and above the
     baseline. Such benefits for reusers, including researchers, innovators, regulators and
     policy-makers, would stem from a more efficient and less costly access to health data
     for reusers (EUR 1.7 billion) and an increased value of health data thanks to sharing
     (EUR 1.1 billion) (for more details on methodology, see annex 5).

     The actions on governance through the voluntary network of Health Data Access Bodies
     are expected to cost EUR 8-9 million for the Commission and Member States. The actions
     on data qualityclxxvii and interoperability are estimated to have a cost of approximately
     EUR 144-313 million over 10 years for the Commission and Member States
     (extrapolating from the current situation, the total number of data sets made available by
     Health Data Access Bodies that adhere to a voluntary label along for the 10 years period in
     all MS is expected to be 2 900-3 800 datasets). The establishment of a voluntary self-
     assessment data quality label will make some contribution to the consistency of a common
     framework. The costs of the voluntary mechanism for manufacturers are expected to be
     overall low, especially in the case of self-assessment (around EUR 7,000-17,500 in
     internal preparation costs). The creation of a European network of national Health Data
     Access Bodies could promote the establishment of new Health Data Access Bodies above
     the baseline scenario, so the costs related to such bodies for the Member States and the


52
     Commission should be expected to increase slightly, between EUR 7 and 28 million
     above the baseline (assumes 3 additional health data access bodies could be established in
     the first 10 years).

     The extension of the current infrastructure MyHealth@EU to secondary uses could
     simplify processes to access and share health data only to a certain extent, particularly for
     multi-country requests. Given that the national institutions dealing with primary and
     secondary use of data are different, such an infrastructure would require substantial change
     to ensure that both primary and secondary use can be served through the same
     infrastructure without compromising interoperability, security and reliabilityclxxviii. The
     deployment and operation of the European network of Health Data Access Bodies, and
     corresponding infrastructure for national and cross-country data access requests, is
     estimated to have implementation and maintenance costs of EUR 136-183 million for the
     Commission and Member States (including costs for the extension of central services as
     part of MyHealth@EU, implementation of new central and generic services across
     Member States, deployment of connections for EU bodies and overall maintenance), but it
     is expected to only lead to a partial coverage, given the voluntary participation. However,
     it is not expected to lead to the achievement of a full standardisation of practices, given
     that the establishment of a consistent framework across Member States will largely depend
     on the rate of adoption of common guidelines. As in the baseline, part of these costs could
     be covered by revenues through fees charged by Health Data Access Bodies. The
     deployment of new Health Data Access Bodies could increase such revenues with
     additional EUR 40 million.

     6.1.2.3 6.1.2.3            Overview of overall costs and benefits

     Table 4. Summary of economic incremental costs and benefits for Policy Option 1 (above the baseline).

                  Costs                                                         Benefits
     Primary          -   EUR 8 m, shared between the Commission            -    EUR 0.4 bn in savings, for
     uses    of           and Member States, for the European                    healthcare      providers     and
     health               network of digital health authorities,                 patients, thanks to an increased
     data                 including    actions  related  to   the                uptake of telemedicine.
                          development of guidelines, requirements          -     EUR 89-115 m in savings, for
                          and assessment frameworks.                             healthcare      providers     and
                      -   EUR 38-106 m for public authorities for                patients,      through      faster
                          the full deployment and operation of                   deployment of cross-border
                          MyHealth@EU.                                           ePrescription services through
                      -   EUR 42-227 m for developers and market                 MyHealth@EU.
                          operators for the implementation of the          -     Faster growth of the digital
                          voluntary labels.                                      health        and        wellness
                                                                                 applications markets, expected
                                                                                 at 5% to 10% per year,
                                                                                 benefiting developers and
                                                                                 consumers.
                  Costs (C): EUR 0.1-0.3 bn                             Benefits (B): EUR 0.4-0.5 bn
     Secondary        -   EUR 8-9 m, shared between the                    -     EUR 1.7 bn in efficiency
     uses   of            Commission and Member States, for the                  savings in the reuse of health
     health               European governance network of Health                  data for researchers and
     data                 Data Access Bodies.                                    innovators (including EUR
                      -   EUR 7-28 m for Member States for the                   additional 20-48 m in revenues
                          establishment and functioning of additional            for Health Data Access
                          Health Data Access Bodies.                             Bodies).
                      -   EUR 136-183 m for the Commission and             -     EUR 1.1 bn in increased value
                          Member States for the deployment and                   for      patients,     healthcare
                          operation of the infrastructure for the                providers and industry thanks
                          European network of Health Data Access                 to further uses of health data.



53
                        Bodies.
                    -   EUR 127-258 m for data reusers to make
                        available and access health data in the
                        EHDS, including cross-border access to
                        health data, data altruism and AI support
                        actions.
                    -   EUR 17-55 m for data owners for the data
                        quality label.
                Costs (C): EUR 0.3-0.6 bn                           Benefits (B): EUR 2.8 bn

     6.1.3 6.1.3         Policy Option 2

     6.1.3.1 6.1.3.1          Impact of actions on primary uses of health data

     This policy option is expected to have a stronger economic impact than Policy Option
     1, and it is estimated to result in EUR 5.4 billion savings for patients and healthcare
     providers over the course of 10 years, including those stemming from a greater uptake of
     telemedicine and cross-border interoperability of ePrescriptions and medical images.

     In this option, an expert group will be established consisting of national digital health
     authorities. The costs for the Commission and Member States to support the work of such
     expert group, and the corresponding subgroups, are estimated at EUR 12 million, over 10
     years, above the baseline (same calculation methodology as in Policy Option 1, but
     assuming greater workload due to stringent governance structure (e.g. assumed for the
     Commission one additional FTE). The costs for the Commission and Member States for
     the implementation of the labels for interoperability, cybersecurity and quality of digital
     health products and services are included in these governance costs.
     Under this option, Member States will be required to implement the services of
     MyHealth@EU, including those linked to electronic identification in health, and the
     services under MyHealth@EU would be extended to provide services to citizens and
     possibly additional services. The investment and maintenance costs for MyHealth@EU
     are estimated to require in the range of EUR 39-109 million in 10 years, above the
     baseline, depending on the cost and speed of implementation. The faster rollout of
     MyHealth@EU would also yield additional EUR 173-232 million in cost savings in the
     area of ePrescriptions and medical imaging alone.
     The mandatory labelling for digital health products and EHR systems (personal health
     data storages, mHealth products falling under MDR), and voluntary labelling of wellness
     applications would be more costly than in Policy Option 1, EUR 0.1-1.1 billion above the
     baseline, given the need for market operators and developers to obtain the mandatory label
     for their products and services (a transitional rollout is assumed for this label (faster than
     in Policy Option 1), with an annual growth rate of 15%-20%. These costs include the cost
     for internal preparations by manufacturers for the self-declaration, but do not include any
     cost of adaptation of the product to the requirements of the label). The Commission would
     be required to develop and maintain a database for certified/labelled products to support
     the rollout of mandatory labelling, which is estimated to cost approximately EUR 32
     million (based on costs of Eudamed for development and maintenance). In Policy Option
     2+, the higher cost of third-party certifications, affects only the medical devices that
     process data that feed into electronic health records, is expected to increase costs for
     developers and market operators to EUR 0.3-1.7 billion (for an overview of the market
     size, please see the Annex 5 on methodological approach the purpose of calculating the
     market sizes, the assumptions are derived from industry analyses and information retrieved
     from product databases in Finland and Italy: 3,800-5,000 products in the EHR systems
     market; 5,000-20,000 products in the digital health products market (medical devices with


54
     EHR data); 20,000 products in the wellness applications market). The costs for mandatory
     certification for EHRs: EUR 20,000-50,000, of which half (EUR 10,000-25,000) of
     internal costs for manufacturers, and half certification fees. Re-certification is assumed
     after 5 years, with costs 80% of the initial certification costs. The costs for labelling are
     between EUR 9,000-32,000).
     Member States are expected to incur costs similar to those under Policy Option 1 to adapt
     their requirements, guidelines and frameworks to those defined at EU level, and/or to
     design them in compliance with the EU standards and frameworks in absence of a national
     framework. The synergies between the labelling systems and other measures are expected
     to generate a rapid increase in the presence of such products on the European single
     market, with an annual growth of 20%-30%. There is also an estimated growth of such
     products on the market of 15%-20% per year.

     6.1.3.2 6.1.3.2         Impact of actions on secondary uses of health data

     A mandatory but flexible intervention on secondary use of health data is likely to result
     in a significant positive economic impact of at least EUR 5.4 billion over the next 10
     years, stemming from efficiency gains in data access as a results of a less costly access to
     health data by reusers, be it researchers, innovators, regulators and policy-makers EUR 3.4
     billion), greater information transparency for policy-makers and regulators (EUR 0.8
     billion), and increased value for patients, healthcare providers and innovators thanks to
     further reuse of health data, through the development of innovative products and services
     in health thanks to data-intensive technologies, such a AI-based systems (EUR 1.2 billion).

     The more intensive use of real-world evidence (RWE) in health policy-making could yield
     substantial additional savings, estimated at EUR 0.8 billion, thanks to greater transparency
     of the effectiveness of medicinal products, resulting in a reduction of costs in the
     regulatory processes, including in public procurement in healthclxxix. Under this option, IT
     infrastructures, such as the EMA’s DARWIN, could be fully integrated in the network of
     Health Data Access Bodies, supporting the EMA, national medicines agencies and HTA
     bodies in better decision-making and renegotiating the prices of different medicinal
     products based on the observed real-world effects, post-authorisation. According to experts
     consulted, in a medium-sized EU country, a 5% saving from re-negotiating the prices in
     drug cost in oncology, diabetes, cardiovascular, respiratory/neurology could result in an
     annual saving of EUR 50 million, which can lead to sizeable effects at EU level. With
     increasing prices of new medicines, this saving is expected to increase in the future.

     This policy option requires the establishment of an expert group consisting of Health Data
     Access Bodies to govern the area of secondary uses and to ensure a consistent framework.
     Such a group is expected to incur costs of EUR 13 million. The increase in governance
     costs originates from the need for additional FTEs for managing the governance
     framework. While including an obligation to designate Health Data Access Bodies, Policy
     Option 2 provides sufficient flexibility to Member States to decide on the organisation of
     the function to be fulfilled by a Health Data Access Body, which could be established as a
     unit in a larger organisation (e.g. Article 7 body under Data Governance Act) or as an
     independent entity (e.g. like Findata or French Health Data Hub). The cost of
     establishment and operation over 10 years can vary significantly depending on national
     choices, ranging between EUR 3.3-12.4 million for a 4-Fulltime Equivalent (FTE) or 15-
     FTE unit, respectively, and EUR 20.6-41.3 million for a 25-FTE or 50-FTE independent
     entity, respectively. The expectation is that total costs for 27 Member States and EEA
     countries will comprise a variety of organisational arrangements for Health Data Access



55
     Bodies. The overall costs for this option could range between EUR 39-157 million for all
     countries, partially recovered through the fees charged to re-users (EUR 36-58 million).

     The requirements for infrastructure and security will increase harmonisation for secure
     data spaces, promote interoperability and standardisation of practices between Health Data
     Access Bodies to enable multi-country data access requests. Such infrastructure is
     expected to cost EUR 176-287 million, including the central services to operate the
     network and the services to be deployed at the level of Health Data Access Bodies. EMA,
     ECDC (and HERA) would also be connected to this infrastructure, but their financing is
     already foreseen under other legislative initiatives.

     The establishment of a mandatory data quality label granted by a third party will
     increase the consistency of a common framework. The total number of data sets made
     available by Health Data Access Bodies that adhere to a voluntary label along for the 10
     years period in all MS is expected to be 4,300-5,600 datasets, with a cost estimated to
     EUR 25-81 million. This action, combined with costs for data reusers to access the data
     made available through the EHDS (EUR 97-204 million), is expected to carry costs of
     approximately EUR 122-285 million. The costs are higher in Policy Option 1 than in
     Policy Option 2, due to multi-country data access requests being more expensive in the
     formern as the latter provides for common data request and reuse procedures. Not having
     such common data request and reuse arrangement increases the cost for data reusers in
     Policy Option 1. The governance and interoperability and data quality requirements also
     translate into simpler procedures/lower burden for stakeholders to request data and process
     the requests, which are reported as part of the benefits (as ‘efficiency gains’). The one-off
     cost of a labelling scheme on data quality could amount to EUR 20,000 and EUR 50,000
     for obtaining the label and EUR 20,000 to EUR 35,000 per year for renewing the label for
     data holders (the figures are derived from the costs of the DiGA system and from the
     impact assessment on Data Governance Act, and consistent with those for primary use of
     health data). The costs of the label are expected to be not so high, especially in the case of
     self-assessment (around EUR 7,000-17,500 in internal preparation costs). In case of the
     third-partly labelling mechanism, it is expected that the costs will be somewhat higher,
     including at least the third-party labelling fee. The costs for AI would entail trainings, but
     also development of standards together with bodies of AI Act and would be between EUR
     8-11 million.

     6.1.3.3 6.1.3.3            Overview of overall costs and benefits

     Table 5. Summary of economic incremental costs and benefits for Policy Option 2 (above the baseline).
                   Costs                                           Benefits
     Primary           -   EUR 12 m, shared between the              -   EUR 5.4 bn in savings, for
     uses     of           Commission and Member States, for             healthcare providers and patients,
     health data           the European expert group of digital          in health costs thanks to an
                           health authorities, including actions         increased uptake of telemedicine
                           related to the development of                 and more efficient exchanges of
                           guidelines, requirements, labels and          health data.
                           assessment frameworks.                    -   EUR 173-232 m in savings, for
                      -    EUR 39-109 m for public authorities           healthcare providers and patients,
                           for the full deployment and operation         through faster deployment of
                           of MyHealth@EU.                               cross-border ePrescription and
                      -    EUR 0.1-1.1 bn for developers and             medical imaging services through
                           market operators to implement and             MyHealth@EU.
                           obtain the labels.                        -   Faster growth of the digital health
                      -    EUR 32 m for the Commission to                and wellness applications markets,
                           develop and maintain a database for           expected at 20-30% and 15-20%
                           certified/labelled products.                  per year, respectively.


56
                   Policy Option 2+:
                       -    EUR 0.3-1.7 bn for developers and
                            market operators to implement and
                            obtain the third-party certifications for
                            and voluntary labels.
                   Costs (C): EUR 0.2-1.2 bn (Option 2+: EUR            Benefits (B): EUR 5.5-5.6 bn
                   0.3-1.8 bn)
     Secondary         -    EUR 13 m, shared between the                    -   EUR 3.4 bn in efficiency savings
     uses     of            Commission and Member States, for                   in the reuse of health data for
     health data            the European governance network of                  researchers and innovators.
                            Health Data Access Bodies.                      -   EUR 0.8 bn in savings thanks to
                       -    EUR 39-157 m for Member States for                  information    transparency     for
                            the establishment and functioning of                policy-makers     and    regulators
                            additional Health Data Access Bodies.               (including additional EUR 36-58
                       -    EUR 176-287 m for the Commission                    m in revenues for Health Data
                            and Member States for the deployment                Access Bodies).
                            and operation of the infrastructure for         -   EUR 1.2 bn in increased value for
                            the European network of Health Data                 patients and healthcare providers
                            Access Bodies.                                      thanks to further reuse of health
                       -    EUR 97-204 m for data reusers to                    data.
                            make available and access health data
                            in the EHDS, including actions to
                            support interoperability and data
                            quality, data altruism and AI support
                            actions.
                       -    EUR 25-81 m for the data quality label
                            for data owners.
                   Costs (C): EUR 0.4-0.7 bn                            Benefits (B): EUR 5.4 bn

     6.1.4 6.1.4            Policy Option 3

     6.1.4.1 6.1.4.1              Impact of actions on primary uses of health data

     This policy option is expected to produce an economic benefit that is lower than
     Policy Option 2, given the stringency of the framework, which could function as a
     disincentive for market operators when entering the European market and the additional
     costs for the EU body. This policy option is expected to provide similar mechanisms
     (mandatory labels replaced by certification) for the adoption of interoperable systems
     across the EU, reducing fragmentation of the digital health market and increasing
     competitiveness of the EU IT sector. Therefore, similarly to Policy Option 2, this option is
     estimated that EUR 5.4 billion could be saved, by patients and healthcare providers,
     over the course of 10 years.

     Binding decisions at EU level through a European Digital Health Body will help
     overcome gaps in regulation of digital health systems. If such function would be
     established as new task of an existing body, the Comission is expected to incur costs of
     approximately EUR 9 million, over the baseline (assuming a requirement of 12 FTE). If
     such function would be established based on a new agency (Option 3+), the Comission is
     expected to incur costs of approximately EUR 321 million, including set-up and yearly
     operation (using the costs of the European Labour Authority as a proxy). Under this
     option, in a similar fashion to Policy Option 2, Member States will be required to
     implement the services of MyHealth@EU, including those linked to electronic
     identification in health, and the services under MyHealth@EU would be extended to
     provide services to citizens and possibly additional services. Assuming that a full rollout of
     MyHealth@EU within the first three years since entry into force of the EHDS, the
     investment and maintenance costs for MyHealth@EU would be marginally higher than for


57
     Policy Option 2 (EUR 42-117 million above the baseline, assuming mandatory adoption of
     digital health services for the exchange all of data domains under the EEHRxF by Year 3).
     The full rollout of MyHealth@EU within a set timeframe would contribute to additional
     savings of EUR 173-232 million from cross-border prescriptions and medical imaging
     alone.
     The actions to support common European interoperability in Policy Option 3 are similar to
     those in Policy Option 2, but include a third-party certification scheme for ensuring
     interoperability and quality of data flows for digital health products (including EHR
     systems, personal health data storages, mHealth products falling under MDR, already
     certified by the MDR notified bodies) and for wellness applications. This mandatory
     certification is expected to generate compliance costs of approximately EUR 0.6-2.9
     billion for market operators, including developers and suppliers of EHR systems, digital
     health products and wellness applications. While the European market for wellness
     applications is estimated to comprise approximately 100,000 products, for the purpose of
     the calculations, an assumption was made that 20% (20,000) could fall under the scope for
     certification. If one considers that all the wellness apps were certified, the costs could
     reach over EUR 8 billion, which would be very unproportionate and cost ineffective. The
     potential benefits of easier cross-border market access could off-set such costs, at least to
     some extent. Synergies between the certification schemes and other measures (such as
     reimbursement and compensation policies) are expected to generate a rapid increase in the
     presence of such products on the market, with annual growth of 10%-20%. A lower
     increase compared to Policy Option 2 is due to the higher costs for certification, which can
     represent a barrier for technology developers and vendors. Under such circumstances,
     wellness applications are estimated to grow at a lower pace (5%-10% per year).

     6.1.4.2 6.1.4.2         Impact of actions on secondary uses of health data

     A high-intensity legislative intervention aiming at harmonisation on secondary use of
     health data matters is likely to result in a positive impact of EUR 6.1 billion during the
     next 10 years, stemming from efficiency gains, increased value of health data and greater
     information transparency for policy-makers and regulators in health.

     The creation of a centralised function at EU level, the European Health Data Access Body
     (EHDAB) that could regulate and govern the functioning of the space for secondary uses
     could contribute to reduce fragmentation. Such function could be established within an
     existing body, with an estimated additional of EUR 106 million, or be assigned to a new
     European Digital Health Body as an additional task (Option 3+). The establishment and
     associated costs of Health Data Access Bodies would remain unchanged from Policy
     Option 2 (EUR 39-157 million), as that option already includes several obligations
     regarding the designation of these entities. However, Policy Option 3 would entail
     implementing a centralised architecture with increased costs at European level for the
     infrastructure of the European Health Data Access Body (EHDAB). The total costs for the
     infrastructure, including implementation and maintenance, could range between EUR 202
     and 313 million. These costs would be partially recovered through the fees charged to re-
     users (EUR 36-58 million, as in Policy Option 2).

     A compulsory certification framework for data quality would cost between EUR 20,000
     and EUR 50,000 to obtain the certification (the total number of data sets for the 10 years
     period in all MS is expected to be 3,400-4,400 datasets). The total amount for the
     compulsory certification scheme for data owners and the costs for reusers to access health
     data across borders is estimated to be between EUR 191-457 million (EUR 57-143 million
     for dataquality and EUR 134-314 million for data reusers). Costs for carrying out the


58
     certification system are considered to be in line with those incurred in national contexts
     (i.e. EUR 10,000 to EUR 25,000), while costs for processing and redistributing multi-
     country data access requests are expected to be limited. High costs of the certification
     scheme for data quality are likely to reduce the availability of niche datasets, lower the
     offer in the EHDS, and possibly have a disproportionally adverse impact on smaller
     dataset owners.

     6.1.4.3 6.1.4.3              Overview of overall costs and benefits

     Table 6. Summary of economic incremental costs and benefits for Policy Option 3 (above the baseline).

                   Costs                                                     Benefits
     Primary           -    EUR 29 m, shared between the                   -  EUR 5.4 bn in savings, for
     uses     of            Commission and Member States, for                 healthcare providers and patients,
     health data            the governance of the EHDS on                     in health costs thanks to an
                            primary uses of health data based on an           increased uptake of telemedicine.
                            existing EU body.                              -  EUR 173-232 m in savings, for
                       -    EUR 42-117 m for public authorities               healthcare providers and patients,
                            for the full deployment and operation             through faster deployment of
                            of MyHealth@EU.                                   cross-border ePrescription and
                       -    EUR 0.6-2.9 bn for developers and                 medical imaging services through
                            market operators to implement and                 MyHealth@EU.
                            obtain the certifications (for EHRs,           -  Faster growth of the digital health
                            digital health products and wellness              and wellness applications markets,
                            apps).                                            expected at 10-20% and 5-10% per
                                                                              year, respectively.
                   Policy Option 3+:
                       -    EUR 321 m for the Commission for the
                            governance of the EHDS on primary
                            uses of health data through a newly-
                            established European Digital Health
                            Body.
                   Costs (C): EUR 0.7-3.1 bn (Option 3+: EUR           Benefits (B): EUR 5.5-5.6 bn
                   0.9-3.4 m)
     Secondary         -    EUR 106 m for the Commission for the           -   EUR 4.1 bn in efficiency savings
     uses     of            governance of the EHDS on secondary                in the reuse of health data for
     health data            uses of health data based on an existing           researchers and innovators.
                            EU body, but with completely new               -   EUR 0.8 bn in savings thanks to
                            functions (access to data etc).                    information     transparency    for
                       -    EUR 39-157 m for Member States for                 policy-makers      and   regulators
                            the establishment and functioning of               (including additional EUR 36-58
                            additional health Data Access Bodies.              m in revenues for Health Data
                       -    EUR 202-313 m for the Commission                   Access Bodies).
                            and Member States for the deployment           -   EUR 1.2 bn in increased value for
                            and operation of the infrastructure for            patients, healthcare providers and
                            the European network of Health Data                industry thanks to further uses of
                            Access Bodies.                                     health data.
                       -    EUR 134-314 m and data reusers to
                            make available and access health data
                            in the EHDS, including actions to
                            support interoperability, data quality
                            data altruism and AI support actions
                       -    EUR 57-143 m for data owners for the
                            data quality certification.

                   Policy Option 3+:
                       -   Same costs (EUR 106 million) for the
                           Commission for the establishment and
                           operation of an independent European
                           Health Data Access Body (EHDAB)



59
                          within the newly set up European
                          Digital Health Body.
                Costs (C): 0.5-1.0 bn (Option 3+: no cost    Benefits (B): EUR 6.1 bn
                increase)


     6.2   6.2              Single Market, competitiveness, innovation, SMEs and
           international aspects

     6.2.1 6.2.1        Baseline scenario

     In the Baseline scenario, the cooperation framework is limited to primary uses of health
     data and mostly to the exchange of health data across national health systems, with no or
     limited intervention in the single market. It provides no incentives at EU level for
     manufacturers to improve the interoperability and connectivity across national borders.
     The reliance on consent as the legal basis for data processing is expected to continue with
     prohibitive costs for researchers and SMEs to reuse health data, constraining the capacity
     of the latter to innovate in the area of data-driven technologies in health. The position of
     the EU in the international arena and as a standard setter would not be coherent, as many
     of the initiatives would remain voluntary.

     6.2.2 6.2.2        Policy Option 1

     Policy Option 1 relies on a decision-making system based on consensus and voluntary
     participation does not provide a strong incentive to overcome the fragmentation of the
     EU’s digital health market, nor does it create forces that will increase the competitiveness
     of the EU IT sector. The heterogeneity of standards and specifications and limited
     interoperability raise barriers and additional costs for manufacturers, especially SMEs, to
     enter new markets. With regard to the secondary use of health data, Option 1, like the
     baseline, in terms of governance, voluntary participation will not provide strong
     instruments to overcome the fragmentation of initiatives and frameworks for the reuse of
     health data.

     6.2.3 6.2.3        Policy Option 2

     Policy Option 2 is expected to have a relatively strong positive impact on competitiveness
     and the single market. The main aspects of the national and EU governance structures are
     expected to provide strong incentives for the adoption of systems that allow individuals to
     control their health data, with interoperable systems within and between Member States,
     which, in turn, will help reduce the fragmentation of the eHealth market and increase the
     competitiveness of the EU’s IT sector. National reimbursement and compensation policies
     for digital health services and products will be based on EU frameworks and guidelines,
     better aligned with international standards. Legal frameworks will therefore become more
     similar, and this is expected to reduce cross-border market entry barriers, including for
     SMEs. This could create new competitiveness opportunities for European SMEs on the
     global market. This measure will impact the development of a whole new scenario for
     scalable innovation, competitiveness, and overall operationalisation of digital products and
     services. Overall, respondents in the public consultation believed a certification scheme
     granted by third parties (a mandatory independent assessment of the interoperability level)
     would be most appropriate to foster the uptake of digital health products and services at
     national and EU level (52%). A smaller proportion of respondents said an authorisation
     scheme managed by national bodies would be appropriate (43%). The option of using a
     voluntary labelling scheme was the least popular (19%). With regards to the secondary use
     of health data, a system where access to data is simplified, but the trust and security are


60
     enhanced can fuel research and innovation. A system where access to data becomes
     cheaper (compared to getting the individual consent of data subjects) and volume of
     available data increases, would support different players, including SMEs, to bring
     forward innovation. Over time, this is expected to contribute to the development of a
     common EU system for secondary use of health data which, in turn, is expected to support
     research, development of new products and services, delivery of personalised medicine
     and more evidence-based policy-making. This could boost the global competitiveness of
     the EU. This holds the potential for new medical discoveries, better predictive capabilities,
     better preventative measures and improved ability to adapt, optimise and react to
     largescale health risks. An EU wide infrastructure would allow access to data from several
     Member States. SMEs would be able to have easier access to diverse data which would
     allow them to compete with large players within the EU and globally. Respondents in the
     Public Consultation also said that measures supporting secondary use of health data would
     have benefits in terms of providing access to cutting-edge, efficient and safe care (e.g.
     thanks to faster innovation in health – 77% of respondents said the impact would be high –
     and increased safety of healthcare and of medicinal products or medical devices – 75%), as
     well as benefits on healthcare systems efficiencies (e.g. better informed decision-making –
     77% – and technological progress – 76%).

     At global level, the EU can become a standards setter, as it happened with the EU Digital
     COVID certificate (which was only possible under of a strong legal basis and a
     harmonised approachclxxx. A more systematic implementation of international standards
     can open new international markets to European companies. Translation of patients’ data
     in English or other languages can support European citizens travelling or leaving to third
     countries. International cooperation in research and innovation area could be facilitated by
     the new framework on secondary use of health data.

     6.2.4 6.2.4        Policy Option 3

     Policy Option 3 is expected to have a relatively strong positive impact on competitiveness
     and the single market. The harmonisation efforts concerning standards and specifications
     can support manufacturers to enter new markets. On secondary use of health data, the
     situation would be similar to Policy Option 2 and the European Data Access Body would
     further facilitate the cross-border access to health data, creating more research and
     innovation. The EU’s international position could be stronger and defended by an EU
     body. However, the costs for certification of standards could impact negatively on
     companies, especially SMEs.

     6.3   6.3               Impacts on fundamental rights

     6.3.1 6.3.1        Baseline scenario

     The expected impact on fundamental rights of the baseline is rather limited. Although
     GDPR provides a common framework, the different national level legislations linked to its
     implementation will remain, perpetuating the current landscape of divergent rules,
     processes, standards and infrastructures as described in section 2.2.

     6.3.2 6.3.2        Policy Option 1

     The impact on fundamental rights is expected to be moderate. The voluntary network of
     Member States authorities will allow for the exchange of experiences, including in relation
     to the implementation of procedures and frameworks that protect privacy of individuals.
     The voluntary adoption of guidelines and voluntary participation in infrastructure will not

61
     guarantee patients effective data portability rights cross-borders and the impact will be
     minimal at national level if there is variation in standards across Member States.

     6.3.3 6.3.3        Policy Option 2

     This policy option is expected to have a significant positive impact on fundamental rights
     related to data protection and free movement, as through MyHealth@EU, citizens will be
     able to effectively share their health data when travelling abroad in the language of the
     country of destination or take the data with them when moving to another country.
     Citizens will be given additional possibilities to access and transmit digitally their health
     data, building upon the provisions of GDPR and market operators in health (either
     healthcare providers or providers of digital services and products) will be obliged to share
     health data with user-selected third parties from the health sector. The proposal will
     provide the technical and practical means to enforce these rights (common standards,
     specifications, labels) without compromising on the required safety measures to protect
     data subject’s rights under the GDPR. It would contribute to the increased protection of
     health personal data and the promotion of the free movement of such data as enshrined in
     Article 16 of the TFEU.

     This option defines an EU framework for accessing the health data for public interest and
     scientific, historical research and statistical purposes, building upon the possibilities
     offered by the GDPR in this respect. It will include suitable and specific measures required
     to safeguard the fundamental rights and the interests of data subjects. Setting up Health
     Data Access Bodies will ensure a predictable and simplified access to health data, a higher
     level of transparency, accountability and security in the data processing. Coordinating
     these bodies at EU level and enshrining their common decision in implementing and
     delegated acts will ensure a level playing field, which will support cross-border analysis of
     health data for research, innovation, statistics, policy making and regulatory purposes. The
     promotion of interoperability of health data and its reuse will contribute to promoting a
     common internal market for health data in line with Article 114 of TFEU.

     6.3.4 6.3.4        Policy Option 3

     In Policy Option 3, the impact on fundamental rights is expected to be very similar to that
     of Policy Option 2, given that the right of citizens to access and transmit digitally their
     health data is the same under this option. However, a comparatively greater positive
     impact on freedom of movement and patients’ control over their health data can be
     expected through stronger requirements of certification for digital health services and
     products (that could also cover security and confidentiality of data).

     Establishing a regulatory agency would have a strong positive effect on the protection of
     personal data and privacy, as it would ensure the implementation of a consistent
     framework for reuse of health data in compliance with the GDPR and in collaboration with
     National and European personal data supervisory authority. The agency could also ensure
     a simplified access to cross-country types of data.

     6.4   6.4               Social and environmental impact

     6.4.1 6.4.1        Baseline scenario

     Regarding the cross-border digital infrastructure for primary uses of health data, there is
     no clear prospect, in the baseline scenario, for MyHealth@EU to achieve full EU
     coverage and complete the rollout of its services portfolio. This has direct negative

62
     consequences where EU citizens and residents seek healthcare services in a Member State
     that is different from their country of affiliation, as healthcare professionals will not be
     able to access crucial medical information. The gap between digitally skilled and digitally
     unskilled citizens and end-users will persist in the baseline. The baseline scenario will see
     a slower realisation of the potential benefits of the reuse of health data. In the absence of
     coordinated EU action for the reuse of health data subject to rights of others and data
     altruism mechanisms, the societal and environmental benefits would be limited.

     6.4.2 6.4.2        Policy Option 1

     This option is expected to have a moderate social impact. The guidance and label for the
     assessment and use of digital tools is expected to lead to an increased uptake and wider
     implementation of these solutions by healthcare providers, with positive effects in areas
     such as chronic disease management. However, while the cross-border digital
     infrastructure in health would be strengthened, and likely completed within 10 years, the
     progress is expected to be slow, leaving in the meantime a large share of the European
     population with no access to MyHealth@EU. Citizens and end-users will require guidance
     on digital skills in order to prevent the digital divide from widening. The exchange of
     experiences in a voluntary network of national authorities responsible for secondary use of
     health data will aid those Member States that have not yet implemented legislation in place
     on public and private use of data for research purposes. However, given its voluntary
     nature, the impacts on unlocking the health value from data in the EU would be limited.

     This option is expected to have a small environmental impact overall. Interoperability,
     reuse of health data and the portability of patients’ data and quality criteria for telehealth
     are likely to improve the efficiency of use of resources, for instance by reducing
     unnecessary tests and visits of patients to hospitals, and the need for paper documentation
     and health records. This effect should reduce the overall carbon footprint of healthcare.
     However, greater digitalisation of health data and data portability will require larger scale
     IT infrastructure. This may increase the use of energy and other resources, and increase the
     carbon footprint of the healthcare sector, and partially offset the resource-efficiency gains
     stemming from interoperability.

     6.4.3 6.4.3        Policy Option 2

     This option is expected to have a significant social impact. This will put the patient at the
     centre with regards to management of his/her data in relation to healthcare professionals. If
     digital solutions are interoperable and supported by reimbursement, it will encourage their
     growth and uptake. With more data flowing in the system, new innovations can be put
     forward out, to the benefits of the patients. This option should lead to enhanced equal
     accessibility and availability of innovative products for diagnosis, and treatments,
     contributing to a reduction in health inequalities, including facilitating better access to
     healthcare in remote or rural areas a more consistent monitoring and early intervention of
     some patients with chronic diseases, preventing hospitalisations and more aggressive and
     expensive treatments and reducing costs. As explained in problem description, it can
     contribute to better adherence to medication, reduction of unnecessary tests, prevention of
     misdiagnosis and treatment, positively impacting individuals and healthcare systems. The
     mandatory requirement for Member States to deploy MyHealth@EU services within a
     certain timeframe will reduce disparities within the EU when accessing healthcare services
     in the cross-border context.

     Access to data that represent different geographical, behavioural or functional settings and
     depicting the health of different population sub-groups improve research into targeted

63
     prevention and treatment methods. This policy option would also facilitate access to larger
     volumes of health data, enhancing the capacity of research, policy making and regulatory
     initiatives, increasing representativeness of datasets and fostering innovation, including in
     the area of AI. This holds the potential for new medical discoveries, more accurate
     predictive capabilities, more effective preventive measures and improved ability to adapt,
     optimise and react to largescale health risks, as well as low occurrence but high impact
     pathologies.

     Abundance and diversity of data would support better decision making, including of
     regulatory authorities. It would increase transparency, negotiation capacity, bringing down
     the prices for some drugs, supporting the repurposing of medicinal products, to the benefit
     of patients. For example, rare diseases include small population sizes were clinical trials
     may not be feasible. A mix of randomised trials and access to high quality health data
     would be required to study populations with unmet medical needs and contextualisation of
     treatment benefits for single-arm studies. Reliable and timely evidence is required for the
     regulatory decisions after a serious adverse drug reactions that impacts the benefit-risk
     balance. As an illustrative example, a 1-year time saving in regulatory action for a
     medicine with 1,000,000 users in the EU and an uncommon adverse drug reaction
     frequency (0.001) at 20% case fatality proportion could potentially prevent 1,000 cases,
     including 200 deaths.

     With regard to environmental impacts, similarly to Option 1, the establishment of
     extensive digital infrastructure, high volume of data traffic and storage, and manufacturing
     of digital devices to support research and innovation may lead to digital pollution
     including some negative environmental impacts. On the other hand, it will also reduce
     resources required for different processes related to healthcare or policy-making (e.g.
     travel-related pollution, energy and paper used in refinement of policy measures) and
     research (e.g. digital pollution from having to replicate processes as additional data
     becomes available).

     6.4.4 6.4.4        Policy Option 3

     This option is expected to have a significant social impact. The action in this option for
     assessment and use of digital tools should accelerate further organisational change, at a
     greater speed than in Policy Option 2. The mandatory connection of all healthcare
     providers would ensure frictionless movement of health data across the EU. The
     development of digital tools would encourage the advancement of digital healthcare
     services. As explained, there are substantial societal benefits with the advancement of
     digital healthcare solutions.

     As in Policy Option 2, access to more coherent and granular data on the health of different
     sub-groups of population will benefit research into targeted prevention and treatment
     methods. This would in turn broader availability of innovative health products that could
     improve health outcomes and foster inclusion of neglected groups of citizens through
     increased knowledge. A higher intensity intervention to a greater extent than in option 2,
     as explained above can optimise capacity to conduct research and innovate, and
     improve policy making.

     With regard to environmental impacts, this option is expected to have a similar impact to
     Policy Option 2.




64
     7    7                      HOW DO THE OPTIONS COMPARE?

     Annex 11 provides the comparison of expected impacts for each measure or dimension
     characterising the assessed options. This dimension-by-dimension comparison is the basis
     for the overall comparison in this section and the choice in chapter 8 of the best-
     performing combination of measures for the Preferred Option. Table 7 presents an
     overview of the ratings of the impacts of each policy option against a series of assessment
     criteria, covering effectiveness, efficiency, coherence, feasibility, EU added value and
     proportionality.
     Table 7. Overall comparison of policy options.
      Criteria                                                           Policy        Policy        Policy
                                                                         Option 1      Option 2      Option 3
     Effectiveness: contributing to achieving the policy objectives
     Empower citizens through digital control of their personal health
     data and support their free movement of people by ensuring that +                ++            ++
     health data follows them
     Unleash the data economy by fostering a genuine single market                    + + (Option
                                                                       +                          +++
     for digital health services and products                                         2+: + + +)
     Ensure a consistent framework for the reuse of health data for
                                                                       +              ++            ++
     research, innovation, policy-making and regulatory activities
     Effectiveness: other impacts
     Social impacts                                                                   + + (Option
                                                                       +                          +++
                                                                                      2+: + + +)
     Impacts on fundamental rights and freedom                          +             ++          ++
     Environmental impacts                                              +             +           +
     Competitiveness, SMEs and Single Market                            +             ++          ++
     Efficiency: comparison of benefits and costs
     Investment and compliance costs                                                                – – (Option
                                                                        –             ––
                                                                                                    3+: – – –)
      Savings and benefits                                                +            ++           ++
      Coherence
      Internal coherence                                                  –            +              +
      External coherence                                                  +            +              +
      Legal and Political Feasibility                                     +            +              –
      EU added-value                                                      –/+          +              ++
      Proportionality                                                     +            ++             +
     For efficiency, effectiveness and EU added value, the scores are given on the expected magnitude of impact
     as explained above: + + + being strongly positive, + + positive, + moderately positive, –/+ neutral, –
     moderately negative, – – negative and – – strongly negative. For legal/political feasibility and coherence, +
     means that the assessment is positive, and – means that it is negative.

     In terms of the effectiveness in achieving the policy objectives, Option 2 and 3 are the
     highest-scoring options in comparison with Option 1, mostly as a consequence of their
     stronger governance system, the establishment of new citizens’ rights and appropriate
     measures to address health data sharing issues related to interoperability and other aspects
     and a common legal basis for processing health data for reuse. Option 3 scores higher than
     Option 2 when it comes fostering a genuine single market for digital health as it includes a
     more effective mechanism (third party certification for EHR systems and digital health
     products that are medical devices) to regulate the market of electronic health records and
     digital health products. The need under Option 3 for third party certification for wellness
     applications, which do not pursue a medical use, risks erecting too high barriers for SMEs
     to enter the market, with a subsequent negative effect on the promotion of the uptake of
     such products across the EU. Therefore, Option 2+ provides a better balance by ensuring
     trustworthiness on the fulfilment of the mandatory requirements through third party
     certification for EHR systems and digital health products that are medical devices
     transmitting data to EHRs, while keeping market entry requirements to the minimum in the


65
     wellness applications market with a self-declared quality label. With regards to central
     governance under option 3, existing EU health-related bodies, such as the ECDC or the
     EMA have specific mandates in subdomains in health that do not match the transversal
     nature of the European Health Data Access Body function. Moreover, EMA and ECDC do
     not have the necessary skills and capacity to deal with primary use of health data and
     interoperability, which makes the re-use of an existing agency for primary and secondary
     use of health data an unfeasible option. At the same time, creating a new EU body would
     require a large investment (over EUR 300 million over 10 years) making this option cost-
     inefficient. In addition, such an approach and the setting up of a new EU body is unlikely
     to get the needed political support with the co-legislators. Therefore, option 2 with
     reinforced cooperation through expert groups remains the best performing option.

     Option 1 would generally have a very limited impact on achieving the objectives on
     primary and secondary uses of health data, particularly when it comes to completing the
     deployment of the necessary digital infrastructures. The combination of the infrastructures
     for primary and secondary uses does not seem to be a feasible option, given its technical
     complexity and the fact that actors involved and purposes are differentclxxxi. While
     voluntary participation and guidelines could help improve the practical implementation
     initiative among the Member States participating, measures under Option 1 remain non-
     binding and their outcomes are highly dependent on the willingness of Member States to
     follow guidelines and adapt national (and regional) legal, technological and organisational
     frameworks. Given the poor results demonstrated by such an approach in the Evaluation of
     Article 14 of the CBHC Directive, expectations of achieving the objectives through Policy
     Option 1 are low.

     As regards social impacts, Policy Option 2+ and 3 provide the greatest impacts on the
     provision of digital health services in general and of cross-border health services in
     particular, as it strengthens the legal, organisational, semantic and technical
     interoperability of (digital) health services in the EU. This, in turn, is expected to
     contribute to the financial sustainability of health systems, in a context of an ageing
     population, shrinking resources and a likely lack of medical personnel in the next decades.
     This option has the highest potential to provide access to more coherent and disaggregated
     health data, reduce research silos and help research and policymaking in providing
     targeted prevention and treatment methods (also using AI), fostering research and new
     medical discoveries. The mandatory certification of medical devices that feed data in
     electronic health records (option 2+), albeit more expensive than a voluntary approach, is
     the most effective way of ensuring that data which represents essential information of
     patients can be shared. Other voluntary approaches would allow the manufacturers to opt
     for proprietary standards, limiting the sharing of data between their devices and own
     platorms in hospitals, whithout sharing data between different healthcare providers. Policy
     Option 2 has a positive impact on these aspects as well, albeit to a lower degree due to the
     less structured governance and lower harmonisation of standards recognition. Policy
     Option 1, based on voluntary participation and guidelines, will provide a reduced
     contribution, limited to the number of Member States participating and their willingness to
     follow common guidelines. Policy Option 1, based on voluntary participation and
     guidelines, will provide a reduced contribution, limited to the number of Member States
     participating and their willingness to follow common guidelines.

     With the introduction of AI for healthcare, which is dependent on access to health data, the
     health sector would see great benefits flowing from the increased opportunities for
     innovation. Through the better functioning of the internal market, this societal value will
     be further unleashed, while allowing for the necessary measures to protect against


66
     discrimination and bias and to promote quality predictions on the basis of high-quality
     data.

     Concerning the impacts on fundamental rights and freedoms, the analysis focussed on
     the (indirect) effects of the options on the right to freedom of movement and on the
     protection of privacy and personal data. All the policy options will have positive impacts
     on these elements because of their support to interoperability and (cross-border) provision
     of health services, and because they include security features to protect sensitive personal
     data. Overall, Policy Option 2 and 3 scores higher on fundamental rights and freedoms due
     to the integration of electronic identification in the system, which is expected to provide
     further security and rights to individuals in the protection of their personal data (as the
     option guarantees better harmonised EU standards), with option 3 having a more stringent
     governance. For secondary uses of health data, both Option 2 and Option 3 are considered
     to have similar positive impacts, as they both guarantee increased harmonisation and
     coordination of efforts on the protection of personal data and privacy, with designated
     national Health Data Access Bodies responsible for supporting such protections.

     All policy options are likely to have (limited) environmental impacts, resulting from the
     improved efficiency of resources and data use, which will translate into a reduction in
     unnecessary tests and patient hospital visits, and reduce the need for paper documentation
     (with higher positive impacts for the policy options 3 and 2). On the other hand, digital
     infrastructures and data centres are energy-intensive, and this aspect may (partially) offset
     the benefits listed above. Policy Options 2 and 3 are expected to have similar
     environmental impacts.

     On international aspects, option 3, followed by option 2 has the highest chances to
     impose the EU as a global standard setter. Option 3 would support best the international
     collaboration. All the options would support EU citizens to access their data in English,
     facilitating their travel to third countries, but options 2 and 3 would have the highest
     coverage. Also, options 2 and 3 would support a more uniform approach to third country
     stakeholders to access to data through data access bodies (but solid authentication of
     researchers is needed). In general, options 2 and 3 have the highest impact on single
     market, while option 1 would continue the current fragmentation. In terms of impact on
     SMEs, option 2 ensures harmonisation and opens new markets for European companies
     and SMEs, while impacting less on SMEs compared to option 3. Option 1 would fail to
     address the current fragmentation, with the associated costs for companies and SMEs.

     For the efficiency criterion, the analysis focussed on investments, savings and benefits,
     and impacts on competitiveness and the functioning of the Single Market. All policy
     options require investments from the Commission and Member States to support the
     governance systems and the digital infrastructure, and from manufacturers to support the
     measures on interoperability, data and software quality standards and artificial intelligence.
     Similarly, the policy options generate compliance costs for the different stakeholders to
     maintain the governance and digital infrastructure once in place, and to ensure adherence
     to the standards and requirements for interoperability and quality of digital health products
     and services (e.g. for setting-up and carrying out labelling and certification schemes, as
     well as to implement standards compliant with the requirements, which are likely to
     increase the production costs for manufacturers). The costs are highest in option 3,
     followed by option 2+/2 and 1.

     Investments and compliance costs will generate benefits in terms of cost savings for
     patients (e.g. moving from traditional medicine to telehealth services that are well
     connected with the rest of the health digital ecosystem) and patients’ time saved (reducing

67
     visits to doctors and hospitals, duplication of tests, etc.). It would support manufacturers
     enter new markets and would support researchers, innovators, policy makers and
     regulators have access to more health data easier and at lower prices. The deployment of
     the measures on the use of health data will impact on EU’s competitiveness and the
     functioning of the Single Market by reducing the fragmentation of the digital health
     markets across the EU and the competitiveness of the EU IT sector, and by increasing the
     volume and quality of health data available for reuse purposes, with positive implications
     for healthcare provision (including in an emerging domain such as the use of Artificial
     Intelligence).

     In this regard, Option 2 scores highest in terms of efficiency, providing the better balance
     among investments and costs required to sustain the system, savings and economic
     benefits for society at large, and competitiveness and the functioning of the EU market.
     Option 3 is the one requiring the most investments, being the most ambitious in terms of
     governance, digital infrastructure and interoperability and quality standards. However,
     Option 3 risks stifling innovation with too resource-intensive requirements for market
     operators, reducing the availability of niche data sources, lowering their presence on the
     EHDS, and having a disproportionally adverse impact on smaller dataset owners. Option
     1, based on voluntary participation, risks producing benefits only for the participating
     Member States, widening the existing gaps among Member States in terms of research and
     technological development competitiveness and ultimately economic growth.

     As regards competiveness of the single market, this refers to the actual and potential
     barriers to entry and exit, the number of companies in the sector, the relative share of the
     market across companies and the level of profitability. The competitiveness of the single
     market depends on the degree the EU business sector is able to offer better quality
     products and services at the same or lower costs compared with business from other
     geographic areasclxxxii. Hence, most of the effect on competitiveness depends on the effect
     of measures on costs structure, productivity and innovation. Option 2 and Option 3 are
     more coherent with the existing legal framework and policies for data governance, support
     and supervision of Artificial Intelligence and the protection of personal data. There may be
     some feasibility issues with these two options, but Option 1, while having fewer feasibility
     issues, risks hindering the implementation of the EU frameworks on data governance and
     AI in the domain of digital health.

     Finally, concerning coherence, Option 2 and Option 3 are more coherent with the existing
     legal framework and policies for data governance, support and supervision of Artificial
     Intelligence and the protection of personal data. Option 3’s stronger governance systems
     (EU bodies for primary and secondary uses) may generate feasibility concerns, as not all
     Member States may be likely to agree on proposals, making the decision-making difficult
     to achieve and slowing EU action in the domain. On the other hand, Option 1, while
     having fewer feasibility issues, risks hindering the implementation of the EU frameworks
     on data governance and artificial intelligence in the domain of digital health. Option 2
     offers the best balance.

     With regards to proportionality and subsidiarity, a number of options were considered
     in pursuing the Treaty objectives. These options looked at the impacts of both primary and
     secondary use of data based on a number of indicators including economic, social,
     environmental, fundamental, rights, SMEs, single market, competitiveness and
     international. The analysis concluded that the preferred option is Option 2. Option 2
     pursues the Treaty objectives aimed to be achieved by this proposal. At the same time, the
     content and form option 2 shows that in both qualitative and quantitative terms, it better


68
     promotes the Union objectives at Union level and does not exceed what is necessary to
     achieve these objectives. Option 1 provides only marginal improvements the Baseline,
     which has been shown as highly ineffective by the evaluation of the digital aspects of the
     CBHC Directive.

     8   8                     PREFERRED OPTION

     After the assessment of the effectiveness, efficiency and coherence of the Policy Options
     for primary and secondary uses of health data, the preferred option for the EHDS is
     Option 2+. Option 2+ builds upon Option 2 and ensures a strong governance system for
     primary uses of health data, a mandatory digital infrastructureclxxxiii encompassing basic
     cross-border digital health services (the five current health domains of the European
     Electronic Health Record Exchange Format), with possible additions to provide other
     cross-border services to citizens and interoperability of healthcare professionals’ registries,
     and the integration of electronic identification (eID) for healthcare professionals and
     patients. This option also implement sat a practical level the rights of citizens to control
     their health data, and enable access to it, irrespective of healthcare provider (public or
     private) and data source, supported by an obligation of healthcare and technology
     providers to share the user’s health data with user-selected third parties belonging to the
     health sector subject to fines charged by data protection authorities. This option provides
     for mandatory requirements and enforced through third-party certification for EHR
     systems and digital health products that are medical devices transmitting data to EHRs and
     voluntary labels for wellness applications. Third-party certification for digital health
     products and services at EU level is expected to enhance the interoperability of data and
     thus the availability of quality data for secondary use, contributing to that objective as
     well.

     Table 8. Estimated distribution per stakeholder of total direct costs and benefits in the Preferred
     Option (Policy Option 2+) (all costs and benefits are above the baseline and in EUR million).
     Stakeholder                                           Bound Primary uses Secondary            Total
                                                                     of health data uses of health
                                                                                      data
     Public authorities (regulators and policy- Costs      Lower     51               351          402
     makers, including Member States'                      Upper     121              743          864
     authorities, the Commission and EU         Benefits   Lower                      1,413        1,413
     bodies)                                               Upper                      1,413        1,413
     Manufacturers, suppliers of EHR            Costs      Lower     271                           271
     systems, digital health products/services             Upper     1,683                         1,683
     and wellness applications
     Innovators (in digital health, medical     Benefits   Lower                      1,688        1,688
     devices and pharmaceutical domains)                   Upper                      1,688        1,688
     Researchers                                Benefits   Lower                      1,701        1,701
                                                           Upper                      1,701        1,701
     Healthcare service providers               Benefits   Lower     4,436                         4,436
                                                           Upper     4,482                         4,482
     Patients/citizens                          Benefits   Lower     1,109            615          1,724
                                                           Upper     1,121            615          1,735
     Overall                                    Costs      Lower     322              351          673
                                                           Upper     1,804            743          2,547
                                                Benefits   Lower     5,545            5,416        10,961
                                                           Upper     5,602            5,416        11,019
     The preferred option for the EHDS in the area of primary use of health data is visualised in
     Annex 4. The impact assessment shows that Option 2+ is expected to be highly effective in
     achieving the policy objectives of the intervention regarding the digital single market in
     health. Option 2+ is preferred over Option 2 and Option 3, as Option 2+ is slightly less


69
     cost-efficient, but highly effective at achieving the objectives (for more details, see overall
     table on cost-effectiveness in Annex 3), while it promotes the use of health data and of
     digital health services and products without imposing excessively stringent requirements
     on market operators for wellness applications. Additionally, Option 2+ is preferred over
     Option 1, as Option 1 would only provide marginal improvements over the baseline and
     would fall short of achieving the objectives. Option 2+ is also efficient, requiring a
     balanced mix of investments from the Member States, the Commission and other
     stakeholders, while remaining ambitious in terms of governance, digital infrastructure and
     interoperability and quality standards, and it is also highly promising in terms of impacts
     on competitiveness and Single Market. Finally, Option 2+ is coherent with the existing
     legal framework and policies for data governance, support and supervision of AI and
     protection of personal data.
     Regarding secondary uses of health data, the federated governance structure of Option 2
     and its measures for promoting interoperability are the most cost-effective. Figure 7
     depicts the interplay between the governance frameworks for primary and secondary uses
     in the context of the EHDS, whereby the expert groups for each subspace prepare the
     necessary guidelines, requirements and assessments frameworks, liaising where necessary,
     and delegated or implementing acts are used for binding decision making. The operational
     implementation is then performed by digital health authorities and Health Data Access
     Bodies for primary and secondary uses, respectively.
     The preferred option for the EHDS in the area of secondary use of health data is visualised
     in Annex 4.




                                   Figure 7. EHDS Overall governance.

     Concerning effectiveness, Option 2+ will ensure a full deployment of the European
     network of Health Data Access Bodies and a common framework for data discovery,
     access and processing in health across the EU. Option 2+ provides the best balance
     between investments and costs required to sustain the system, savings and economic
     benefits for society at large, unleashing the potential of the health data economy and
     competitiveness and the functioning of the EU market. Finally, regarding coherence,
     Option 2+ will grant a high level of coherence with the existing legal framework and
     policies for data governance, support and supervision of AI and the protection of personal
     data, as well as with the increasing interest on setting-up systems for supporting access to
     health data for secondary use across Member States, guaranteeing stronger coordination at
     EU level. Option 3 is less preferred, for it would introduce a governance mechanism at EU
     level for which no existing EU body seems to fit. Option 1 is unlikely to achieve the
     objectives of the EHDS in the area of secondary uses of health data.




70
     The preferred Option 2/2+, for both primary and secondary uses, will yield the best
     outcomes given that the required investments can be covered largely through EU funds,
     including EU4Health for specific investments in digital health infrastructure, governance
     and actions supporting interoperability, Digital Europe Programme for additional actions
     supporting interoperability and cross-sectorial investments in the European common data
     spaces (e.g. secure clouds), Horizon Europe for digital health research, as well as the
     Recovery and Resilience Facility and cohesion funds for national implementation. As a
     point of reference, investments supported by the EU funds under the 2014-2020 financial
     cycle included EUR 1 billion for digital health, and the national plans include investments
     linked to digitisation and modernisation of the health sector of over EUR 12 billion under
     the Recovery and Resilience Facility.

     9   9                   HOW WILL ACTUAL IMPACTS BE MONITORED AND EVALUATED?

     The evolution and performance of the EHDS wouldneed to be closely monitored to assess
     how this initiative contributes to the better functioning of the single market in the area of
     digital health and to more effective and efficient health research, innovation, policy-
     making and other regulatory activities. The indicators for the monitoring and evaluation
     framework for the preferred option are described in section 9. The indicators selected for
     Specific Objective 1 build upon the existing monitoring framework for MyHealth@EU.
     The Commission will review the indicators periodically and evaluate the impacts of the
     legislative act after 7 years.

     In light of the current challenges to monitor the progress in Member States on digitisation
     in healthcare, the monitoring and evaluation framework below foresees a series of yearly
     indicators collected at national level and monitored at EU level. The preferred option
     foresees a federated approach for governance and for the infrastructure rollout, which
     would allow for monitoring progress while the system is gradually being implemented.

     The bodies responsible for governing the EHDS would compile evidence about the
     progress and main achievements of this initiative at EU and Member State level. This will
     help improve the existing services and the uptake and experience of citizens, healthcare
     providers and professionals, researchers and businesses with digital health. To this end, the
     responsible authorities at Member State level would be asked to regularly report on the
     efficiency and impact of the services to be provided through the EHDS. The table below
     presents the indicators and data sources proposed for the specific objectives of the EHDS.




71
     Table 9. Monitoring and evaluation framework for the preferred option.
      Specific objective       Indicators (relevant for evaluation after 7 years)                    Sources                                          Data collection    Targets
                                                                                                                                                      frequency
      Empower citizens            Percentage of people having access to their electronic health      Reporting in the context of Digital Decade       Every 5 years      100% by 2030
      through increased digital   records
      control of their personal   Number of Member States in routine operations with                 Coverage of MyHealth@EU reported by              Yearly             All Member States by
      health data and support     MyHealth@EU services                                               governance structure responsible for the                            2027
      their free movement by                                                                         infrastructure
      ensuring that health data   Total percentage of Pharmacies enabled with MyHealth@EU            Reported by governance structure responsible     Yearly            75% by 2030
      follows them (SO1)          services (as Country B)                                            for the infrastructure
                                  Total percentage of Hospitals enabled with MyHealth@EU             Reported by governance structure responsible     Yearly             75% by 2030
                                  services (as Country B)                                            for the infrastructure
                                  Level of citizens satisfaction of MyHealth@EU services             Reported by governance structure responsible     Every 5 years      70% satisfied or very
                                                                                                     for the infrastructure                                              satisfied by 2030
      Unleash the data            Number of digital health products and services certificed (EHRs    Data on certification/labelling framework        Yearly             1000 by 2030
      economy by fostering a      and medical devices)                                               reported by the dedicated national authorities
      genuine single market                                                                          and notified bodies
      for digital health services Number of non-compliance cases with the mandatory requirements Statistics reported by digital health authorities    Yearly             Less than 10 by 2030
      and products (SO2)
                                  Number of mobile wellness applications with a quality label in the Data on labelling framework reported by the      Yearly             100 by 2030
                                  central EU database                                                dedicated national authorities
      Ensure a consistent         Number of peer-reviewed research publications, policy documents, Surveys/enquiries on reusers                       Every 5 years      100 by 2030
      framework for the reuse regulatory procedures using data accessed via the EHDS                 Data from bibliometric analysis and reports
      of health data for          Number of Member States in routine operations with the             Reporting by national Health Data Access         Yearly             All Member States by
      research, innovation,       infrastructure for secondary uses of health data                   Bodies                                                              2030
      policy-making and           Number of digital health products and services, including AI       Surveys/enquiries on reusers                     Every 5 years      100 by 2030
      regulatory activities       applications, developed using data accessed via EHDS               Report/data on label of digital health product
      (SO3)                                                                                          and services
                                  Number of accepted and rejected applications requesting data for   Reporting by national Health Data Access         Yearly             1000 by 2030
                                  reuse                                                              Bodies
                                  Volume of revenue from data requests per Member State              Reporting by national Health Data Access         Yearly             10 million by 2030
                                                                                                     Bodies
                                  Satisfaction from applicants requesting access to data (broken     Dedicated survey applicants of data access       Every 5 years      70% happy or very
                                  down by type of applicant)                                         requests                                                            happy by 2030
                                  Average number of days between application and access to data      Reporting by national Health Data Access         Yearly             60 by 2030
                                                                                                     Bodies
                                  Number of data quality labels issued, disaggregated per quality    Reporting by national Health Data Access         Yearly             1000 by 2030
                                  category                                                           Bodies




72
END-NOTES




i
     As mentioned in the mission-letter-stella-kyriakides_en.pdf (europa.eu)
ii
  The European Commission is building a strong European Health Union, in which all EU countries prepare
and respond together to health crises, medical supplies are available, affordable and innovative, and
countries work together to improve prevention, treatment and aftercare for diseases such as cancer. In
addition to the European Health Data Space, the other pillars are: crisis preparedness and response, Europe’s
beating cancer plan and the pharmaceutical strategy for Europe. The new EU4Health financial programme,
with a budget of more than EUR 5.3 billion, will go beyond crisis response and provide investments to build
stronger and more resilient national healthcare systems.
iii
   Including the following proposals: Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the
Council amending Regulation (EC) No 851/2004 establishing a European Centre for disease prevention and
control, Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on serious cross-border
threats to health and repealing Decision No 1082/2013/EU, Proposal for a Regulation of the European
Parliament and of the Council on a reinforced role for the European Medicines Agency in crisis
preparedness and management for medicinal products and medical devices.
iv
      https://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/ST-13-2020-INIT/en/pdf
v
      https://ec.europa.eu/health/ern/covid-19_en
vi
       Council       of    the     European     Union    Conclusions    (18                December    2020),
https://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/ST-14196-2020-INIT/en/pdf
vii
       https://www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/document/TA-8-2019-0083_EN.html
viii
       COM(2020) 66 final, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:52020DC0066
ix
      COM/2020/767 final, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:52020PC0767
x
   https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/data-act-proposal-regulation-harmonised-rules-fair-access-
and-use-data
xi
      https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/state_of_the_union_2020_letter_of_intent_en.pdf
xii
       state_of_the_union_2020_letter_of_intent_en.pdf (europa.eu)
xiii
       soteu_2021_address_en_0.pdf (Europa.eu)
xiv
       2021 Commission work programme – key documents | European Commission (europa.eu)
xv
       C(2008) 3282, available at: EUR-Lex - 32008H0594 - EN - EUR-Lex (europa.eu)
xvi
       EUR-Lex - 32011L0024 - EN - EUR-Lex (europa.eu)
xvii
        https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/MEMO_12_959
xviii
        COM(2018) 233 final
xix
  Electronic cross-border health services | Public Health (europa.eu); EUR-Lex - 32019D1765 - EN - EUR-
Lex (europa.eu)
xx
  Commission Recommendation on European Electronic Health Record Exchange Format Recommendation
on a European Electronic Health Record exchange format | Shaping Europe’s digital future (europa.eu)
xxi
       EUR-Lex - 32020D1023 - EN - EUR-Lex (europa.eu)
xxii
        eHealth and COVID-19 | Public Health (europa.eu)
xxiii
    Recommendation CM/Rec(2019)2 of the Committee of Ministers to member States on the protection of
health-related                          data,                         available                   at:
https://search.coe.int/cm/pages/result_details.aspx?objectid=090000168093b26e
xxiv
   Recommendation of the OECD Council on Health Data Governance adopted on 13 December 2016,
available at: https://www.oecd.org/health/health-systems/Recommendation-of-OECD-Council-on-Health-
Data-Governance-Booklet.pdf
xxv
        gs4dhdaa2a9f352b0445bafbc79ca799dce4d.pdf (who.int)
xxvi
         https://www.digitalhealthindex.org/stateofdigitalhealth19
xxvii
  https://www.oecd.org/health/health-systems/Recommendation-of-OECD-Council-on-Health-Data-
Governance-Booklet.pdf
xxviii
    In the United States, legislation has been introduced that gives citizens the right to access their health
data in an electronic format if it is already stored in such a fashion.
xxix
    In this impact assessment, “health data” is used as a term to refer to both personal and non-personal
electronic data concerning health and social care.
xxx
   There are exceptions to this definition. For example, the purpose of personal health data processed in the
context of clinical trials is generally research and development, i.e. its primary use is not healthcare. Disease
registries have been collected with the primary purpose of research, innovation and policy making.
xxxi
    Electronic health record, or EHR, refers to collections of longitudinal medical records or similar
documentation of an individual, in digital form (source: Commission Recommendation on European
Electronic Health Record Exhange Format). An electronic health record system refers to a system for
recording, retrieving and manipulating information in electronic health records.
xxxii
         https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/recommendation-european-electronic-health-record-
exchange-format
xxxiii
    Notable examples such as the Biobanking and Biomolecular Resources Research Infrastructure
(BBMRI-ERICxxxiii)         or       the      ELIXIR      Data      Platform      https://elixir-
europe.org/platforms/data#:~:text=The%20goal%20of%20the%20ELIXIR%20Data%20Platform%20is,with
in%20a%20coordinated%2C%20scalable%20and%20connected%20data%20ecosystem.
xxxiv
    As laid down in Regulation 2017/745, a medical device means any instrument, apparatus, appliance,
software, implant, reagent, material or other article intended by the manufacturer to be used, alone or in
combination, for human beings for one or more specific medical purposes that may include, for example, the
diagnosis, prevention, monitoring, prediction, prognosis, treatment or alleviation of disease.
xxxv
    Lupiáñez-Villanueva, F., Gunderson, L., Vitiello, S., Febrer, N., Folkvord, F., Chabanier, L., Filali, N.,
Hamonic, R., Achard, E., Couret, H., Arredondo, M. T., Cabrera, M. F., García, R., López, L., Merino, B.,
Fico, G. (2022). Study on Health Data, Digital Health and Artificial Intelligence in Healthcare, Publications
Office of the European Union. https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/179e7382-b564-11ec-
b6f4-01aa75ed71a1/language-en
xxxvi
    The technological enablers for digital health include mobile, connected medical devices, edge and cloud
computing technologies, artificial intelligence, nano and wearable sensors and actuators, the internet of
things, distributed ledger technologies, high-performance computing and high capacity (wireless) internet
networks, and are leading to ever-more pervasive software and the growing amount of data collected in
health.
xxxvii
      Literature on health data specifically highlights the relevance of multiple types of health data,
including: (i) EHR, which can contain information on symptoms, medical exams, tests, referral patterns,
prescriptions and death records as well as pharmacy records, diagnostic procedures, hospitalisations and
other healthcare services; (ii) claims data giving indications of the nature of service usage, insurance and
other administrative hospital data; (iii) omics data: genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, epigenomics,
metagenomics, metabolomics, nutriomics; (iv) clinical trials data; (v) pharmaceutical data such as
pharmacovigilance (medicines safety) data; (vi) social media including web data pertaining to health such as
data from patients forums on health topics; (vii) mobile apps, telemedicine and sensor data; (viii) geospatial
health data (health data disaggregated by location); (ix) ambient data from ‘smart’ environments (e.g.
electricity and gates data on the way people walk which can be used to estimate the occurrence of falling);
(x) information on wellbeing, socio-economic, behavioural data; and (xi) other records of relevance to
health such as occupational records, sociodemographic profiles or environmental monitoring data such as on
pollution.
xxxviii
     Mobile health application refers to a software-based medical device that processes health data on a
mobile device and is intended by the manufacturer to be used, alone or in combination, for human beings for
one or more specific medical purposes that may include, for example, the diagnosis, prevention, monitoring,
prediction, prognosis, treatment or alleviation of disease. A mobile wellness application distinguishes for not
being intended by the manufacturer for a medical purpose and, therefore, not being a medical device itself. A
2019 study published by the Dutch National Institute for Public Health and the Environment analysed the
market of mobile health applications in the Netherlands and found that 21% of sampled applications were a
medical device (i.e. a mobile health application according to the definition above), while the rest 79% were
not (i.e. a wellness mobile application). Study available here: https://www.rivm.nl/publicaties/apps-under-
medical-devices-legislation-apps-onder-medische-hulpmiddelen-wetgeving
xxxix
     Marjanovic, S., Ghiga, I., Yang, M., & Knack, A. (2017). Understanding value in health data
ecosystems:       A       review      of      current   evidence     and     ways       forward.
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR1972.html.
xl
       Article 9 of the GDPR
xli
   Thiel, R., Lupiáñez-Villanueva, F., Deimel, L., Gunderson, L. and Sokolyanskaya A. (2021). eHealth,
Interoperability of Health Data and Artificial Intelligence for Health and Care in the EU.
https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/dae/redirection/document/79897
xlii
        ev_20151123_co03_en.pdf (europa.eu)
xliii
        European Commission, European Interoperability Framework.
xliv
        Eurostat, 2018.
xlv
   Health Spending Projections to 2030: New results based on a revised OECD methodology, Lorenzoni, L.,
et al., 2019; OECD Health Working Papers, No. 110, OECD Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1787/5667f23d-
en
xlvi
        McKinsey (2020). Shaping the digital transformation in Europe.
xlvii
   OECD/EU (2018), Health at a Glance: Europe 2018: State of Health in the EU Cycle, OECD Publishing,
Paris. https://doi.org/10.1787/health_glance_eur-2018-en
xlviii
    Lupiáñez-Villanueva, F., Gunderson, L., Vitiello, S., Febrer, N., Folkvord, F., Chabanier, L., Filali, N.,
Hamonic, R., Achard, E., Couret, H., Arredondo, M. T., Cabrera, M. F., García, R., López, L., Merino, B.,
Fico, G. (2022). Study on Health Data, Digital Health and Artificial Intelligence in Healthcare, Publications
Office of the European Union. https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/179e7382-b564-11ec-
b6f4-01aa75ed71a1/language-en
xlix
        https://www.oecd.org/health/health-systems/Empowering-Health-Workforce-Digital-Revolution.pdf
l
 Grand View Research, Electronic Health Records (EHR), Market analysis 2016-2028, base year 2020.
Opportunities beyond COVID-19 crisis, Electronic Health Records Market Size Report, 2021-2028
(grandviewresearch.com).
li
      Electronic Health Records Market Worth $35.1 Billion By 2028 (grandviewresearch.com)
lii
       Idem
liii
   Thiel, R., Lupiáñez-Villanueva, F., Deimel, L., Gunderson, L. and Sokolyanskaya A. (2021). eHealth,
Interoperability of Health Data and Artificial Intelligence for Health and Care in the EU.
https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/dae/redirection/document/79897
liv
  Webb, E., Hernández-Quevedo, C., Williams, G., Scarpetti, G., Reed, S., & Panteli, D. (2021). Providing
health services effectively during the first wave of COVID-19: A cross-country comparison on planning
services, managing cases, and maintaining essential services. Health Policy (Amsterdam, Netherlands).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healthpol.2021.04.016
lv
 For example, according to the 2021 Country Health Profile for Belgium, the number of teleconsultations in
Belgium peaked during the two waves of COVID-19 in 2020, but fell when restrictions were lifted.
lvi
      European      Commission        (2018).      Market     study   on    telemedicine.   Available    at:
https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/default/files/ehealth/docs/2018_provision_marketstudy_telemedicine_en.pdf
lvii
        Ibid.
lviii
        https://www.oecd.org/health/tackling-wasteful-spending-on-health-9789264266414-en.htm
lix
       Telemedicine Market Size, Share, Growth & Trends [2020-2027] (fortunebusinessinsights.com)
lx
      European      Commission        (2018).     Market      study   on    telemedicine.   Available    at:
https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/default/files/ehealth/docs/2018_provision_marketstudy_telemedicine_en.pdf
lxi
       Ibid.
lxii
        Socio-economic impact of mHealth: An assessment report for the European Union (pwc.in)
lxiii
        Online data code: HLTH_SHA11_HC
lxiv
        No data available for Malta.
lxv
   MedTech Europe (2021). The European Medical Technology Industry in figures 2021. Available at:
https://www.medtecheurope.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/medtech-europe-facts-and-figures-2021.pdf
lxvi
        Devices - EUDAMED (europa.eu)
lxvii
  REGULATION (EU) 2017/ 745 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL - of 5
April 2017 - on medical devices, amending Directive 2001/ 83/ EC, Regulation (EC) No 178/ 2002 and
Regulation (EC) No 1223/ 2009 and repealing Council Directives 90/ 385/ EEC and 93/ 42/ EEC (europa.eu)
lxviii
            https://www.rivm.nl/publicaties/apps-under-medical-devices-legislation-apps-onder-medische-
hulpmiddelen-wetgeving
lxix
     71,000 new health and             fitness apps launched    in 2020, estimates     App Annie report
(leisureopportunities.co.uk)
lxx
        Digital Health Trends 2021 - IQVIA
lxxi
   Mobile Health & Fitness App Spending Jumped 70% Last Year in Europe to a Record $544 Million
(sensortower.com)
lxxii
         Ibid.
lxxiii
   Flynn, R., Plueschke, K., Quinten, C., Strassmann, V., Duijnhoven, R. G., Gordillo-Marañon, M.,
Rueckbeil, M., Cohet, C., & Kurz, X. (2021). Marketing Authorization Applications Made to the European
Medicines Agency in 2018–2019: What was the Contribution of Real-World Evidence? Clinical
Pharmacology & Therapeutics. https://doi.org/10.1002/cpt.2461
lxxiv
         Calculated as a share of the estimated value of data sharing in the EU. For more details, see Annex 5.
lxxv
        Flynn et al. (2021).
lxxvi
   Eskola, S. M., Leufkens, H. G. M., Bate, A., De Bruin, M. L., & Gardarsdottir, H. (2021). Use of Real-
World Data and Evidence in Drug Development of Medicinal Products Centrally Authorized in Europe in
2018–2019. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics. https://doi.org/10.1002/cpt.2462
lxxvii
    Half of them included RWE for the full development phase (48.6%) and for supporting regulatory
decisions at the registration (46.8%), whereas over a third (35.1%) included RWE for the early development.
lxxviii
     Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the
protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of
such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation).
lxxix
         Regulation (EU) 2018/1725
lxxx
   Such processing also requires a basis under Article 6 GDPR, like any other processing of personal data,
but the specificity of health data is in article 9.
lxxxi
    Thiel, R., Lupiáñez-Villanueva, F., Deimel, L., Gunderson, L. and Sokolyanskaya A. (2021). eHealth,
Interoperability of Health Data and Artificial Intelligence for Health and Care in the EU.
https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/dae/redirection/document/79897
lxxxii
          These conditions apply on top of the requirements for lawfulness of processing in Article 6 GDPR.
lxxxiii
     The Finnish Act on secondary use of health data covers both public and private data holders; in France,
the beneficiaries of data obtained through French Data Hub can be public or private entities that carry out
research projects of public interest – e.g. that contributes to information concerning health, definition and
evaluation of health policies, innovation in the area of health and healthcare etc; FR law forbids to use the
health data for marketing towards healthcare providers or patients or to exclude or modify the insurance
premia of data subject based on the data obtained from FR Data Hub; the DE law goes further and punishes
under criminal law the de-identification of data subjects
lxxxiv
          Findata, French Data Hub, German Data Lab, Danish and Norwegian data access bodies.
lxxxv
          E.g. CNIL, in France
lxxxvi
     For details, see Page d'accueil | Health Data Hub (health-data-hub.fr); Réaliser sa demande
d’autorisation auprès de la CNIL | Health Data Hub (health-data-hub.fr); Findata; Data requests - Findata;
Data permits - Findata
lxxxvii
          EUR-Lex - 52020PC0767 - EN - EUR-Lex (europa.eu)
lxxxviii
          https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/data-act-proposal-regulation-harmonised-rules-fair-
access-and-use-data
lxxxix
         https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:52021PC0206
xc
  Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on measures for a high common
level of cybersecurity across the Union, repealing Directive (EU) 2016/1148, COM(2020) 823 final
xci
       Evaluation in Annex 12.
xcii
   Regulation (EU) 2021/953 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2021 on a
framework for the issuance, verification and acceptance of interoperable COVID-19 vaccination, test and
recovery certificates (EU Digital COVID Certificate) to facilitate free movement during the COVID-19
pandemic (Text with EEA relevance)
xciii   https://ec.europa.eu/health/medicinal-products/clinical-trials_en

   Medicinal products for rare diseases (‘Orphan medicines’) (Regulation (EC) No 141/2000, Medicinal
xciv

products for children (Regulation (EC) No 1901/2006, Advanced therapy medicinal products (Regulation
(EC) No 1394/2007.
xcv
   Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EC) No
851/2004 establishing a European Centre for disease prevention and control, Proposal for a Regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council on serious cross-border threats to health and repealing Decision No
1082/2013/EU, Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on a reinforced role
for the European Medicines Agency in crisis preparedness and management for medicinal products and
medical devices.
xcvi

https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/default/files/preparedness_response/docs/hera_2021_propcouncreg_medical
-countermeasures_en.pdf
xcvii
         https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/default/files/non_communicable_diseases/docs/eu_cancer-plan_en.pdf
xcviii
         EU Mission: Cancer | European Commission (europa.eu)
xcix
       Deetjen,    U     (2016).   European       E-Prescriptions: Benefits    and    Success          Factors.
https://www.politics.ox.ac.uk/materials/publications/15224/workingpaperno5ulrikedeetjen.pdf
c
 OECD (2019), “Health in the 21st Century: Putting Data to Work for Stronger Health Systems”, OECD
Health Policy Studies, Éditions, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/e3b23f8e-en (Accessed 06/12/2021).
ci
  Thiel, R., Lupiáñez-Villanueva, F., Deimel, L., Gunderson, L. and Sokolyanskaya A. (2021). eHealth,
Interoperability of Health Data and Artificial Intelligence for Health and Care in the EU.
https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/dae/redirection/document/79897
cii
      2.2 Working abroad (europa.eu)
ciii
   Thiel, R., Lupiáñez-Villanueva, F., Deimel, L., Gunderson, L. and Sokolyanskaya A. (2021). eHealth,
Interoperability of Health Data and Artificial Intelligence for Health and Care in the EU.
https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/dae/redirection/document/79897
civ
       Electronic cross-border health services | Public Health (europa.eu)
cv

https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/default/files/cross_border_care/docs/impl_directive_presciptions_2012_ia_e
n.pdf

https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/default/files/cross_border_care/docs/impl_directive_presciptions_2012_ia_s
ummary_en.pdf
cvi
   Hansen, J., Wilson, P., Verhoeven, E., Kroneman, M., Kirwan, M., Verheij, R., van Veen, E.-B. (2021).
Assessment of the EU Member States rules on health data in the light of GDPR.
https://ec.europa.eu/health/system/files/2021-02/ms_rules_health-data_en_0.pdf (Annexes available at:
https://ec.europa.eu/health/system/files/2021-02/ms_rules_health-data_annex_en_0.pdf).

   Recommendation on a European Electronic Health Record exchange format | Shaping Europe’s digital
cvii

future (europa.eu)
cviii
    eHealth Network guidelines to EU Member States and the European Commission on an interoperable
eco-system for digital health and investment programmes for a new/updated generation of digital
infrastructure in Europe ev_20190611_co922_en.pdf (europa.eu)
cix
   Thiel, R., Lupiáñez-Villanueva, F., Deimel, L., Gunderson, L. and Sokolyanskaya A. (2021). eHealth,
Interoperability of Health Data and Artificial Intelligence for Health and Care in the EU.
https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/dae/redirection/document/79897
cx
       Evaluation in Annex 12.
cxi
       https://www.hiqa.ie/sites/default/files/2018-05/ePrescribing-An-Intl-Review.pdf
cxii
     Deetjen European E-Prescriptions: Benefits and Success Factors [Online]. Available from
https://www.politics.ox.ac.uk/materials/publications/15224/workingpaperno5ulrikedeetjen.pdf
cxiii
    Thiel, R., Lupiáñez-Villanueva, F., Deimel, L., Gunderson, L. and Sokolyanskaya A. (2021). eHealth,
Interoperability of Health Data and Artificial Intelligence for Health and Care in the EU.
https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/dae/redirection/document/79897
cxiv
        Ibid.
cxv
        Ibid.
cxvi
        BfArM - Digital Health Applications (DiGA)
cxvii
        Validation pyramid - mHealthBELGIUM
cxviii
    Lupiáñez-Villanueva, F., Gunderson, L., Vitiello, S., Febrer, N., Folkvord, F., Chabanier, L., Filali, N.,
Hamonic, R., Achard, E., Couret, H., Arredondo, M. T., Cabrera, M. F., García, R., López, L., Merino, B.,
Fico, G. (2022). Study on Health Data, Digital Health and Artificial Intelligence in Healthcare, Publications
Office of the European Union. https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/179e7382-b564-11ec-
b6f4-01aa75ed71a1/language-en
cxix
        Validation pyramid - mHealthBELGIUM
cxx
       2013-19020.pdf (govinfo.gov), Medical-Device-Fact-Sheet-09FEB11.pdf (nist.gov)
cxxi
        mHealth label published | Shaping Europe’s digital future (europa.eu)
cxxii
    https://www.bfarm.de/EN/Medical-devices/Tasks/Digital-Health-Applications/_node.html (acccessed on
01/12/2021).
cxxiii
                                                                https://www.medtecheurope.org/wp-
content/uploads/2021/11/2111_v4.8_mte_dht_reimbursement16.11.2021-2.pdf
cxxiv
     It is difficult to estimate the size of the European market for mobile health applications, but according to
the IQVIA Institute (Digital Health Trends 2021 - IQVIA) the volume of health-related mobile applications
would have surpassed 350,000 globally in 2021. Assuming a European share that is proportional to the share
in the global medical devices market (27.5%), there could be almost 100,000 mobile health applications in
the European mobile health applications market.
cxxv
    Hansen, J., Wilson, P., Verhoeven, E., Kroneman, M., Kirwan, M., Verheij, R., van Veen, E.-B. (2021).
Assessment of the EU Member States rules on health data in the light of GDPR.
https://ec.europa.eu/health/system/files/2021-02/ms_rules_health-data_en_0.pdf (Annexes available at:
https://ec.europa.eu/health/system/files/2021-02/ms_rules_health-data_annex_en_0.pdf).
cxxvi
     https://tehdas.eu/app/uploads/2021/11/tehdas-citizens-perception-of-and-engagement-with-health-data-
secondary-use-and-sharing-in-europe.pdf
cxxvii
          Ibid.
cxxviii
    https://tehdas.eu/app/uploads/2021/09/tehdas-summary-of-results-case-studies-on-barriers-to-sharing-
health-data-2021-09-28.pdf
cxxix
     13 Member States as using some form of centralised data governance organisation (BG, DK, DE, IE,
EL, FR, CY, MT, NL, PT, SI, SK and FI). More details, in chapter 7 of the study carried out by Verhoeven,
et al. (2021) for the Commission.
cxxx
    Hansen, J., Wilson, P., Verhoeven, E., Kroneman, M., Kirwan, M., Verheij, R., van Veen, E.-B. (2021).
Assessment of the EU Member States rules on health data in the light of GDPR.
https://ec.europa.eu/health/system/files/2021-02/ms_rules_health-data_en_0.pdf (Annexes available at:
https://ec.europa.eu/health/system/files/2021-02/ms_rules_health-data_annex_en_0.pdf).
cxxxi
    Deloitte (2018), Unlocking R&D productivity, Measuring the return from pharmaceutical innovation
2018, Αvailable at: www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/global/Documents/Life-Sciences-Health
cxxxii
    Wouters OJ et al, (2020), Estimated R&D investment needed to bring a new medicine to market, 2009-
2018. JAMA. 323(9) 844-853.
cxxxiii
         https://tehdas.eu/app/uploads/2021/09/tehdas-technical-and-operational-analysis-report-of-existing-
data-sharing-initiatives-2021-09-30.pdf
cxxxiv
     Thiel, R., Lupiáñez-Villanueva, F., Deimel, L., Gunderson, L. and Sokolyanskaya A. (2021). eHealth,
Interoperability of Health Data and Artificial Intelligence for Health and Care in the EU.
https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/dae/redirection/document/79897
cxxxv
     Kruse, C. S., Goswamy, R., Raval, Y., & Marawi, S. (2016). Challenges and Opportunities of Big Data
in Health Care: A Systematic Review. JMIR medical informatics, 4(4), e38. Available from:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5138448/
cxxxvi
     Thiel, R., Lupiáñez-Villanueva, F., Deimel, L., Gunderson, L. and Sokolyanskaya A. (2021). eHealth,
Interoperability of Health Data and Artificial Intelligence for Health and Care in the EU.
https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/dae/redirection/document/79897
cxxxvii
     European Commission (2020). Assessment of the EU Member States rules on health data in the light of
GDPR. https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/health/files/ehealth/docs/ms_rules_health-data_en.pdf (Annexes
available at: https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/default/files/ehealth/docs/ms_rules_health-data_annex_en.pdf).
cxxxviii
      Thiel, R., Lupiáñez-Villanueva, F., Deimel, L., Gunderson, L. and Sokolyanskaya A. (2021). eHealth,
Interoperability of Health Data and Artificial Intelligence for Health and Care in the EU.
https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/dae/redirection/document/79897
cxxxix
     Thiel, R., Lupiáñez-Villanueva, F., Deimel, L., Gunderson, L. and Sokolyanskaya A. (2021). eHealth,
Interoperability of Health Data and Artificial Intelligence for Health and Care in the EU.
https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/dae/redirection/document/79897
cxl
       I.e. the probability for a foreign prescription not to be dispensed.
cxli
   While there is an indication that issues remain in the provision of cross-border prescriptions, it should be
noted that this figure relies on a low response rate of 158 pharmacists across 5 countries
cxlii
    The cost for visiting a local GP is estimated at EUR 65.77, based on a population-weighted extrapolation
of the outpatient/ambulatory activity (2.6 billion consultations in 2019, according to Eurostat) and the total
general outpatient curative and specialised outpatient curative care cost (EUR 132.5 billion in 2019,
according to Eurostat).
cxliii
    The cross-border services for the exchange of ePrescriptions through MyHealth@EU relies on common
structured formats and coded data fields, allowing pharmacists to access the necessary information in their
own language, through a verified system.
cxliv
         Evaluation in Annex 12.
cxlv
         https://eithealth.eu/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/EHDS_report.pdf
cxlvi
    eHealth, Interoperability of Health Data and Artificial Intelligence for Health and Care in the EU. Lot 1 -
Interoperability of Electronic Health Rec
cxlvii
          https://findata.fi/en
cxlviii
          i.e. stored in free text or not coded according to an standardised terminology.

    DG Health and Food Safety (2019), Assessment of the EU Member States’ rules on health data in the
cxlix

light of GDPR.
cl
  Arlett, Peter (2020) Workshop, DARWIN EU (Data Analytics and Real World Interrogation Network),
European                 Medicines               Agency.                 Available                 from:
https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/presentation/presentation-proposal-darwin-eu-data-analytics-real-
world-interrogation-network-parlett-ema_en.pdf
cli
  Data protection issues in cross-border interoperability of Electronic Health Record systems within the
European Union, Giorgia Bincoletta, March 2020, published by Cambridge University Press
clii
   IACOB, N., & SIMONELLI, F. (2020). Towards a European Health Data Ecosystem. European Journal
of Risk Regulation, 11(4), 884-893. doi:10.1017/err.2020.88
cliii
   Medical deserts are areas (e.g. certain rural and remote areas) with inadequate or limited access to
healthcare services, and many times citizens living in such areas need to travel long distances to receive such
services.
cliv
    For instance, immediate access to health data in electronic form or portability of inferred data, such as
tests
clv
   Hansen, J., Wilson, P., Verhoeven, E., Kroneman, M., Kirwan, M., Verheij, R., van Veen, E.-B. (2021).
Assessment of the EU Member States rules on health data in the light of GDPR.
https://ec.europa.eu/health/system/files/2021-02/ms_rules_health-data_en_0.pdf (Annexes available at:
https://ec.europa.eu/health/system/files/2021-02/ms_rules_health-data_annex_en_0.pdf).
clvi
   The EEHRxF includes five data domains: patient summaries, ePrescriptions/eDispensations, laboratory
reports, medical images and reports, and hospital discharge letters.
clvii
   Commission Recommendation on a European Electronic Health Record exchange format C(2019)800 of
6         February          2019          available       at:        https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=uriserv:OJ.L_.2019.039.01.0018.01.ENG

    The right to access one’s health data in electronic format, including those stored by healthcare providers
clviii

(public or private) is supported completely by 100% of the consumer organisations, completely or to a great
extent by 100% on non-EU citizens, 91% of EU citizens, 94% of NGOs, 84% of companies 81% of public
authorities and 74% of business associations responding to the public consultation

   The right to transmit one’s heath data in electronic format to another professional/entity of one’s choice is
clix

considered as important by 100% of consumer organisations, 100% of non-EU citizesn 89% of NGOs, 86%
of companies, 85% of EU citizens, 80% of research institutions, 80% of trade unions, 75% of public
authorities        and    73%    of    business   associations    responding     to   the   public   consultation.
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/state_of_the_union_2020_letter_of_intent_en.pdf
clx
  The penetration of smart phones at EU level is high and increasing (over 86% of population subscribed to
mobile services in 2020),
clxi
   Commission Recommendation on a European Electronic Health Record exchange format C(2019)800 of
6         February          2019          available       at:         https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=uriserv:OJ.L_.2019.039.01.0018.01.ENG
clxii
         mHealth label published | Shaping Europe’s digital future (europa.eu)
clxiii
    Thiel, R., Lupiáñez-Villanueva, F., Deimel, L., Gunderson, L. and Sokolyanskaya A. (2021). eHealth,
Interoperability of Health Data and Artificial Intelligence for Health and Care in the EU.
https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/dae/redirection/document/79897
clxiv
    For example, the Health Data Hub acts as a single point of contact in France for health data discovery
and access request handling and for submission to the French Data Protection Authority (CNIL). However,
other entities, such as research hospitals, are also empowered to handle such requests and for submission to
the CNIL.
clxv
   The detailed overview for the calculations is shown in Annex 5, including the general methodological
approach used in the study supporting this impact assessment.
clxvi
   This figure relies on the estimated yearly costs for the Commission and Member States for the current
cooperation framework in the eHealth Network.
clxvii
          See the conclusions of the evaluation of Article 14 in CBHC Directive in Annex 12.
clxviii
     This estimate is calculated on the basis of costs for services (between EUR 0.3-2.5 million per service)
under the Connecting Europe Facility Programme and based on input from Member States authorities. More
details in Annex 5.
clxix
         https://www.oecd.org/health/health-systems/Empowering-Health-Workforce-Digital-Revolution.pdf
clxx
   Calculated as 10% average of duplicated tests for a total of EUR 14 billion per year for examinations
requiring Computed Tomography, Magnetic Resonance Imaging and PET scans (Eurostat).
clxxi
    Assuming a 4 FTE team per Member State as a lower bound, and a combination of organisational
arrangements across the EU (ranging between 4-FTE and 50-FTE entities) for the upper bound.
clxxii
    Lupiáñez-Villanueva, F., Gunderson, L., Vitiello, S., Febrer, N., Folkvord, F., Chabanier, L., Filali, N.,
Hamonic, R., Achard, E., Couret, H., Arredondo, M. T., Cabrera, M. F., García, R., López, L., Merino, B.,
Fico, G. (2022). Study on Health Data, Digital Health and Artificial Intelligence in Healthcare, Publications
Office of the European Union. https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/179e7382-b564-11ec-
b6f4-01aa75ed71a1/language-en
clxxiii
    Considers, as per the Data Governance Act, a set up cost of EUR 10.6 million and a maintenance costs
of EUR 0.6 million yearly.
clxxiv
     Arlett, P., Kjær, J., Broich, K., & Cooke, E. (2021). Real-World Evidence in EU Medicines Regulation:
Enabling       Use      and     Establishing    Value.     Clinical   Pharmacology     &     Therapeutics.
https://doi.org/10.1002/cpt.2479
clxxv
    Data Analysis and Real World Interrogation Network (DARWIN EU) | European Medicines Agency
(europa.eu)
clxxvi
         European     Commission       (2018).      Market     study   on   telemedicine.   Available    at:
https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/default/files/ehealth/docs/2018_provision_marketstudy_telemedicine_en.pdf
clxxvii
     It assumes that 17 Member States will participate in the network for secondary uses, as cooperation will
be on voluntary basis
clxxviii
     Trasys for the European Commission (forthcoming study). A study on an infrastructure and data
ecosystem supporting the impact assessment of the European Health Data Space.
clxxix
     Monitoring of estimates of effectiveness and whether these are in line with initial authorisation and
estimates used for defining value for reimbursement may allow renegotiating prices with considerable
savings. Borge FC et al. Monitoring real-life utilization of pembrolizumab in advanced melanoma using the
Portuguese National Cancer Registry. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2021;30:342–349. DOI:
10.1002/pds.5163
clxxx
          See further and a thorough analysis on these points by Anu Bradford, The Brussels Effect, OUP 2020
clxxxi
    Trasys for the European Commission (forthcoming study). A study on an infrastructure and data
ecosystem supporting the impact assessment of the European Health Data Space.
clxxxii
    Voinescu, R. and Moisoiu, C., 2015. Competitiveness, theoretical and policy approaches. Towards a
more competitive EU. Procedia Economics and Finance, 22, pp.512-521.
clxxxiii
           The digital infrastructure ecosystem architecture for Policy Option 2 is shown in Annex 4.
