                          EUROPEAN
                          COMMISSION




                                                 Strasbourg, 3.5.2022
                                                 SWD(2022) 131 final

                                                 PART 2/4




                   COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT

                          IMPACT ASSESSMENT REPORT

                              Accompanying the document

     PROPOSAL FOR A REGULATION OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF
                             THE COUNCIL

                          on the European Health Data Space

         {COM(2022) 197 final} - {SEC(2022) 196 final} - {SWD(2022) 130 final} -
                                 {SWD(2022) 132 final}




EN                                                                                 EN
    Table of contents

    ANNEX 1: PROCEDURAL INFORMATION .................................................................. 3
    1.    LEAD DG, DECIDE PLANNING/CWP REFERENCES.......................................... 3
    2.    ORGANISATION AND TIMING .............................................................................. 3
    3.    CONSULTATION OF THE RSB ............................................................................... 3
    4.    EVIDENCE, SOURCES AND QUALITY ................................................................. 7
    ANNEX 2: STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION ............................................................. 9
    ANNEX 3: WHO IS AFFECTED AND HOW? ............................................................... 23
    1.    PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS OF THE INITIATIVE .......................................... 23
    2.    SUMMARY OF COSTS AND BENEFITS ............................................................. 24
    ANNEX 4: GRAPHICAL REPRESENTATION OF DIFFERENT ELEMENTS IN
       THE IMPACT ASSESSMENT................................................................................. 31
    ANNEX 5: METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH ............................................................ 35
    1.    SOURCES                  35
    2.    DISCOUNT RATE ................................................................................................... 35
    3.    TIMELINE                 35
    4.    BASELINE SCENARIO ........................................................................................... 35
    5.    ESTIMATION OF COSTS OF MEASURES PROPOSED ..................................... 38
    6.    GENERAL TAKE-UP/PARTICIPATION SCENARIOS ........................................ 39
    7.    SPECIFIC ASSUMPTIONS USED FOR MEASURES ON PRIMARY USE
          OF HEALTH DATA ................................................................................................. 40
    7.1. GOVERNANCE 40
    7.2. DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE .............................................................................. 41
    7.3. DATA INTEROPERABILITY ................................................................................. 42
    7.4. ECONOMIC BENEFITS .......................................................................................... 45
    8.    SPECIFIC ASSUMPTIONS USED FOR MEASURES ON SECONDARY
          USE OF HEALTH DATA ........................................................................................ 46
    8.1. GOVERNANCE 46
    8.2. DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE .............................................................................. 47
    8.3. DATA INTEROPERABILITY AND DATA QUALITY ........................................ 48
    8.4. ECONOMIC BENEFITS .......................................................................................... 49
    9.    METHODOLOGY AND ASSUMPTIONS USED FOR THE EVALUATION
          OF THE ARTICLE 14 OF THE CBHC DIRECTIVE (ANNEX 12) ....................... 51
    ANNEX 6: COHERENCE WITH OTHER LEGISLATIVE INSTRUMENTS .............. 53
    ANNEX 7: LIST OF M-HEALTH AND TELEHEALTH INITIATIVES
       (LEGISLATION, FRAMEWORKS AND CERTIFICATION/LABELS) ............... 60


1
    ANNEX 8: OVERVIEW OF THE GDPR LEGAL BASIS FOR PROCESSING
       HEALTH DATA FOR DIFFERENT PURPOSES ................................................... 65
    ANNEX 9: OVERVIEW OF NATIONAL BODIES DEALING WITH
       SECONDARY USES OF HEALTH DATA ............................................................. 70




2
    ANNEX 1: PROCEDURAL INFORMATION

    1   1.                  LEAD DG, DECIDE PLANNING/CWP REFERENCES

    The legislative proposal on the European Health Data Space (EHDS) was prepared under
    the lead of the Directorate-General for Health and Food Safety. In the DECIDE Planning
    of the European Commission, the process is referred to under item PLAN/2020/870. The
    Commission Work Programme for 2021 includes a legislative action for a European
    Health Data Space.

    2   2.                  ORGANISATION AND TIMING

    An Inter-Service Steering Group (ISSG) assisted DG Health and Food Safety in the
    preparation of the Impact Assessment and legal proposal. It included Commission services
    of Directorate-Generals CNECT, JUST, GROW, JRC, TRADE, EMPL, MOVE, RTD,
    ECFIN, COMP, REGIO and REFORM, together with the Commission’s Legal Service
    and Secretariat General.

    The ISSG met two times in March 2021 and October 2021. Moreover, the ISSG members
    have already been consulted regularly via formal written consultations and bilateral
    discussions. An Inception Impact Assessment was published on 23 December 2020 and
    was open to feedback from all stakeholders on the Better Regulation Portal for a period of
    6 weeks. The public online consultation was launched on 3 May 2021 and closed on 26
    July 2021.

    The draft Impact Assessment report and all supporting documents were submitted to the
    Regulatory Scrutiny Board (RSB) on 26 October 2021, in view of a meeting on 24
    November 2021. The RSB issued a negative opinion on 26 November 2021. After a re-
    submission of the Impact Assessment report on 21 December 2021, the RSB issued a
    positive opinion on 26 January 2022.

    3   3.                  CONSULTATION OF THE RSB

    The Impact Assessment report was reviewed by the Regulatory Scrutiny Board. After the
    first submission, the RSB issued the following findings:

         (1) The report is not clear on the coherence with other related initiatives.
         (2) The justification of the legal basis is not sufficient and does not reflect the core
             objectives targeted by the initiative.
         (3) The objectives regarding secondary use are not sufficiently specified in their scope.
             They are not sufficiently clear on the coherence and consistency with the legal
             principles on the extent of personal data use, set out in related initiatives.
         (4) The report is not clear on the issue of data control and consent in the proposed
             options.
         (5) The report does not sufficiently justify the combination of measures in the different
             options. It does not sufficiently explain the choice of the preferred option.
         (6) The report is not clear on how the different groups of stakeholders will be affected
             by the proposal. Their views are not well reflected throughout the report.
    The table below lists the changes in response to the recommendations of the RSB in its
    first opinion (negative opinion). Besides these modifications, targeted corrections and
    amendments have been included to address the technical comments provided by the RSB
    to DG SANTE.



3
    Recommendations of the RSB                             Modifications in the impact assessment
                                                           report in response to the Board’s
                                                           recommendations

    (1) The report should clearly identify the gaps        The subsection on the Legal Context (1.3) has
    and overlaps with existing and planned                 been amended and expanded on the provisions
    initiatives, in particular the General Data            from the GDPR, Data Governance Act and Data
    Protection Regulation (GDPR), the Data                 Act that are relevant for the EHDS. Regarding
    Governance Act and the upcoming Data Act.              the GDPR, the implications of portability and
    Coherence with those initiatives should be             consent in health and the functioning of national
    ensured, in particular on the issues of the use of     Health Data Access Bodies have been further
    data for public purposes as well as data               elaborated. Regarding the Data Governance
    altruism, consent, portability and ownership.          Act, the way in which the EHDS would build
    This is especially in relation to secondary uses       upon and further specify the horizontal
    and the creation of a single personal data driven      framework has been clarified. Regarding the
    market for digital health products and services.       Data Act, further discussions were held with
                                                           DG CNECT on the interplay of the Data Act
                                                           with the EHDS, and subsequently the main
                                                           limitations of the Data Act (scope of portability
                                                           and access conditions to data by public bodies)
                                                           in relation to the use cases covered by the
                                                           EHDS have been described. Additionally, the
                                                           Description of the Policy Options (5.2) has been
                                                           amended to take into account the adjustments
                                                           concerning coherence with other legislative
                                                           frameworks.

    (2) The legal basis for this proposal should be        The justification for the choice of Articles 16
    better justified and linked to its main objectives.    and 114 of the TFEU as the legal basis for the
    The report should clarify why Article 168(1) of        EHDS has been elaborated further in subsection
    the TFEU is not the main legal basis given that        3.1, particularly in relation to Article 168(1) of
    the proposal’s core objective is better healthcare     the TFEU. The references to public health have
    for citizens, while Article 114 relates to             been removed for consistency from the
    establishment of a single market for digital           Objectives (Chapter 4) and to keep the focus on
    health data that is more focused on the potential      data protection and single market aspects.
    commercial exploitation of this data.                  Targeted clarifications have been added
                                                           throughout the text to explain that common
                                                           legal basis for the reuse of health data in the
                                                           EHDS is foreseen on grounds of public interest,
                                                           scientific research and statistics, and regardless
                                                           of the nature of the reuser (be this public or
                                                           private). This approach is similar to that of
                                                           existing Health Data Access Bodies such as
                                                           Findata in Finland.

    (3) The report should clarify the main objectives      The subsection on the specific objective on
    of the proposal, in particular related to the          secondary uses of health data (4.2.3) has been
    secondary use of health data. It should be             amended to include the specific main use cases
    explicit on the possible secondary uses of health      that are foreseen under the EHDS (research,
    data and which private and public markets              innovation, policy-making, regulatory activities)
    would be affected. It should clarify how these         and key markets that would be most affected
    uses would comply with the principles and              (healthcare services, digital health products,
    objectives on data access, control and use, as         medical devices and medicinal products).
    outlined in related initiatives. In this respect, it   Specific descriptions of the affected markets
    should differentiate between use of health data        have been added to the subsection on the Socio-


4
    for commercial purposes and use of health data Economic Context (1.2), and the product
    for improving health care.                     markets       targeted    by      measures       on
                                                   interoperability and other aspects have been
                                                   specified in subsection 5.2. The size of the
                                                   problems and the demand for interoperability
                                                   has also been included in subsections 2.2 and
                                                   2.3, including figures where possible. As when
                                                   addressing recommendation (2), targeted
                                                   clarifications have been added throughout the
                                                   text to explain that common legal basis for the
                                                   reuse of health data in the EHDS is foreseen on
                                                   grounds of public interest, scientific research
                                                   and statistics, and regardless of the nature of the
                                                   re-user (be this public or private). A detailed
                                                   description of the existing national legislation
                                                   on secondary use of health data has been
                                                   included in the legal context 1.3.

    (4) The proposed options should be clearer on       The section 1.3 on legal context defines the
    the issue of consent on data use and data           control in the sense of GDPR, as well as the use
    portability, as distinct from interoperability      of consent and law as a legal basis under
    rules, especially with reference to the property    GDPR. It also explains the right of access and
    and liability rules regimes that would apply.       portability, as well as the technical aspects that
                                                        could support the sharing of data and
                                                        enforcement of the interoperability.

                                                        The section 1.1 on technological context
                                                        provides an overview of interoperability needs.
                                                        A new Annex (10) on interoperability has been
                                                        added.

                                                        The descriptions on the types of data describes
                                                        the property regime (5.2.2.2).

    (5) The report should assess whether it is          A dimension-by-dimension analysis on the
    possible that a different combination of            assessed options has been included (Annex 11)
    measures would lead to a better result. It should   to support the comparison of options and justify
    justify each measure that appears in the            the best performing combination of measures
    preferred option and demonstrate that it            (Chapter 7). Two new options have been added
    contains the best performing combination.           in Chapter 5 containing variations of existing
                                                        options (Option 2+ and Option 3+). Option 2+
                                                        is a variation of Option 2 with a mix of
                                                        measures from Option 2 and 3 depending on the
                                                        product category (EHR systems, digital health
                                                        products that are medical devices and wellness
                                                        applications) for ensuring minimum mandatory
                                                        requirements for interoperability and other
                                                        related aspects. Option 3 has been modified so
                                                        that the tasks at EU level are assigned to an
                                                        existing EU body, whereas Option 3+ considers
                                                        the establishment of a new body. The economic
                                                        assessment of the impacts has been amended
                                                        accordingly (6.1), as well as the comparison of
                                                        options (Chapter 7) and the description of the
                                                        Preferred Option (Chapter 8).



5
    (6) The report should provide justification for      The Methodological Approach (Annex 5) has
    all assumptions used when estimating the costs       been strengthened by adding justifications for
    and benefits and should acknowledge                  the assumptions and references to the
    limitations and uncertainties in these estimates     limitations and uncertainties of the estimates
    when proposing a best performing option. The         used in the assessment of the options. Footnotes
    report should be clearer on the costs and            have been included in the subsection on the
    benefits for different groups of stakeholders.       Economic Impact (6.1) to clarify major
                                                         assumptions, limitations and uncertainties. The
                                                         distribution per stakeholder of total direct costs
                                                         and benefits has been included in tabular format
                                                         in the description of the Preferred Option
                                                         (Chapter 8). The part on socio-economic
                                                         context describes the size of the market that is
                                                         being taken into account into the cost/benefit
                                                         analysis of the policy options.

    (7) The report should introduce the views of         New references to the views of stakeholders
    different stakeholder groups in the main report      have been introduced throughout the report,
    and explain how they affect the choice of the        particularly in subsections 2.2 and. 2.3. A new
    combination of measures in the preferred             subsection with the views of stakeholders has
    option. It should clarify and discuss the possible   been added (subsection 5.2.3). Annex 2 and
    divergent views of stakeholders.                     Annex 3 have been enriched.

    After the second submission, noting that its previous recommendations have been
    addressed to a large extent, the RSB issued the following finding:

        (1) The rationale for having a specific sectoral initiative on health data is not
            sufficiently explained.
        (2) The difference between secondary use and data altruism is not clear and this leads
            to confusion in the different consent mechanisms.
        (3) The report does not sufficiently reflect different stakeholder views.

    The table below lists the changes in response to the recommendations of the RSB in its
    second opinion (positive opinion).

    Recommendations of the RSB                           Modifications in the impact assessment
                                                         report in response to the Board’s
                                                         recommendations

    (1) The report should better explain the             Subsection 1.3.1 on the horizontal framework
    rationale behind having a sectoral initiative on     context for this initiative was amended in order
    health data, in particular whether this is due to    to provide additional context and examples in
    its peculiarity and related security issues, and     relation to the limitations of horizontal
    the reason why other horizontal initiatives like     legislations in addressing the specific challenges
    the Data Act may increase the risks of               for the processing of health data. In particular,
    inappropriate use of health data.                    the added elements illustrate that the operational
                                                         needs for the processing of health data are not
                                                         properly met by horizontal initiatives and are
                                                         fully addressed by this tailored sectoral
                                                         legislation.

    (2) The report should clarify what data altruism The part on the opt-in opt-out mechanism as
    could add to secondary use of data. It should been removed from the document since consent


6
    clarify the application of different consent was found not to be relevant to the proposal.
    mechanisms regarding data altruism and
    secondary use. It should explain better why
    another consent mechanism (opt-in) would be
    applied compared to opting-out for secondary
    use when no explicit individual consent is
    required.

    (3) The report should clarify if the benefits from            The role of Health Data Access Bodies in the
    data governance by Health Data Access Bodies                  data governance as providers of safeguards to
    are related to obtaining individual consent or                the rights and freedoms of the data subjects has
    rather originate from the need to safeguard the               been further explained in Subsection 5.2.2.2.
    rights and freedoms of the data subjects when
    no explicit consent is required.

    (4) The report should better differentiate the The views of the stakeholders, as they were
    stakeholder views throughout instead of expressed in the public consultation, have been
    providing majority views.                      more broadly been included in the different
                                                   chapters of the impact assessment report to
                                                   connect stakeholder views to the different
                                                   policy options.


    4       4.                      EVIDENCE, SOURCES AND QUALITY

    This proposal is supported by a number of studies and background documents, in
    particular:

           A study on the assessment of the EU Member States’ rules on health data in the light
            of the General Data Protection Regulation1,
           A study on the regulatory gaps to cross-border provision of digital health services and
            products, including artificial intelligence, and the evaluation of the existing
            framework for cross-border exchange of health data2;
           A study supporting the impact assessment of policy options for an EU initiative on a
            European Health Data Space;
           A study on an infrastructure and data ecosystem supporting the impact assessment of
            the European Health Data Space (forthcoming);
           A study on the electronic health record interoperability in the European Union
            (MonitorEHR)3;



    1
        Hansen, J., Wilson, P., Verhoeven, E., Kroneman, M., Kirwan, M., Verheij, R., van Veen, E.-B. (2021). Assessment of
           the EU Member States rules on health data in the light of GDPR. https://ec.europa.eu/health/system/files/2021-
           02/ms_rules_health-data_en_0.pdf (Annexes available at: https://ec.europa.eu/health/system/files/2021-
           02/ms_rules_health-data_annex_en_0.pdf).
    2 Lupiáñez-Villanueva, F., Gunderson, L., Vitiello, S., Febrer, N., Folkvord, F., Chabanier, L., Filali, N.,
         Hamonic, R., Achard, E., Couret, H., Arredondo, M. T., Cabrera, M. F., García, R., López, L., Merino,
         B., Fico, G. (2022). Study on Health Data, Digital Health and Artificial Intelligence in Healthcare,
         Publications Office of the European Union. https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-
         /publication/179e7382-b564-11ec-b6f4-01aa75ed71a1/language-en
    3
        The study covered all 27 Member States, the United Kingdom and Norway.
         https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/dae/redirection/document/79897




7
           A study on the use of real-world data (RWD) for research, clinical care, regulatory
            decision making, health technology assessment, and policy making4;
           A market study on telemedicine5;
           The EDPS preliminary opinion on the EHDS6.




    4
        https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/6f758166-2198-11ec-bd8e-01aa75ed71a1/language-
            en/format-PDF/source-232403056
    5

    https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/default/files/ehealth/docs/2018_provision_marketstudy_telemedicine_en.pdf
    6
      https://edps.europa.eu/sites/default/files/publication/20-11-
           17_preliminary_opinion_european_health_data_space_en.pdf




8
    ANNEX 2: STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION

    Different stakeholders have been consulted in different phases of the legislative process.

    The consultation activities aimed at collecting the views of national public health, digital
    health and data protection authorities, healthcare providers, healthcare professionals,
    academic and research institutions, patient associations, economic actors and their
    professional associations (e.g. health technology industry, digital industry), consumer
    organisations, NGOs, trade unions and citizens. These stakeholder groups were expected
    to have important information and insights on:

          the achievements of the provisions on eHealth of the CBHC Directive, any
           implementation and application problems and their underlying causes and on possible
           ways forward and their impacts;

          how health data governance mechanisms and structures can best maximise the social
           and economic benefits of health data usage in the EU, as well as how digital health
           services and products and AI can deliver greater levels of accessibility, availability,
           sustainability and affordability of healthcare.

    This section provides an overview of the consultation activities carried out as part of the
    Public Consultation, the Assessment of the EU Member States Rules on health data in
    light of GDPR, the Study on Health Data, Digital Health and Artificial Intelligence in
    Healthcare and the Study on an infrastructure and data ecosystem supporting the impact
    assessment of the European Health Data Space.

        1. Public Consultation

    The European Commission conducted a Public Consultation (PC) to gather the views of
    the public on an EU initiative for a EHDS. The purpose of the consultation was to inform
    the Commission’s work to support the impact assessment on the problems to be tackled,
    the policy options to be considered and their likely impacts. The consultation was open
    from 3 May 2021 to 26 July 20217.

    382 valid responses to the PC were received and of these respondents, 64 provided
    additional documentation. EU citizens were the most common type of stakeholders among
    respondents (26%), followed by non-governmental organisations (NGOs) (21%),
    academic/research institutions (14%), companies/business organisations (11%), business
    associations (8%), public authorities (5%), non-EU citizens (2%), trade unions (1%) and
    consumer organisations (1%). Respondents came from 23 EU Member States and 8 non-
    EU countries. The most represented country was Belgium 8 (19%), followed by Spain
    (11%), France (11%), Germany (11%) and Italy (8%).

    On the question of fundamental rights, Member States’ positions are rather fragmented,
    also based on national practices, the status of national debate on the right to privacy and
    re-use of personal data. Some highlighted the importance of ethics in the re-use of


    7
          https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/better-regulation/have-your-say/initiatives/12663-Digital-health-data-and-
         services-the-European-health-data-space_en
    8
      Some of the respondents were international and pan-European organisations based in Belgium.




9
     secondary health data and noted that it was too early to determine whether the EHDS
     would improve privacy. If EHDS would simply be a tool linking already existing datasets,
     the security of personal data would not be affected. However, if it allowed researchers to
     access and analyse datasets, personal data security and privacy would be affected, and
     mechanisms preventing privacy breaches would need to be built into the EHDS’
     infrastructure. They further noted that since EHDS2 concerns policy, which can impact the
     freedom of movement, it is indirectly related to the right of freedom of movement. Other
     Member States emphasized the need to stick to some key objectives first, with the focus
     primarily being on delivering trust to European citizens, which implies legislation ensuring
     data security, as well as a robust infrastructure. Member States expressed specific points
     with regard to the opt-in vs. opt-out approach to the secondary use of health data, and on
     the role of National Agencies/Authorities in authorising access. Some Member States
     advocated for a system where the patient could easily stop the sharing of their data at any
     time. Although an opt-out system would likely make more data available due to the effort
     it takes to opt out, it could generate criticism. To avoid unnecessary bureaucracy, no
     additional ethical clearance should be required when a researcher was already cleared by
     an ethics committee at his/her institution. A regionalised Member States considered that
     legislation regarding the authorization to access data should be done at Member State
     level, as the competences in those matters are currently national. The governance body
     may therefore have to apply different criteria depending on the Member State where the
     data come from.

     The opinions of Member States on the possible characteristics of the EHDS were
     different as well. In the view of a federal Member State, it is important that the Member
     States keep in place their own legislation regarding the privacy of their citizens and that it
     is respected; legislation should be based on cultural ways of thinking as considers how
     citizens handle their data. However, EU guidelines or a general framework could be
     established. In this way, the national and EU legislations could complement each other and
     address cross-border issues particularly in times of crisis. Other Member States preferred a
     pluri-disciplinary approach on the main topics, as a wide range of competences will be
     needed. This involves discussing a clear strategy with all Member States, focusing both on
     a broad plan of action and technical operations. In Spain’s view, the current model for the
     governance of the eHealth Network is reasonable since consensus between the Member
     States is needed in the decision-making process.

     Access and use of personal health data for healthcare

     The most important objectives that respondents said a European framework on the access
     and exchange of personal health data should aim included:

           supporting and accelerating research in health (89%), with most support coming
            from industry (97%), academia (94%) and public authorities (88%)

           promoting citizens’ control over their own health data, including access to health
            data and transmission of their health data in electronic format (88%), with most
            support coming from consumer organisations (100%), industry (94%) and EU
            citizens (85%) and public authorities (93%). The lowest support for this objective
            is among trade unions (80%) and academic/research institutions (78%).

           facilitating the delivery of healthcare for citizens across borders (83%), with most
            support coming from consumer organisations (100%), industry (93%) and public
            authorities (77%)


10
     The most contentious was the objective to promote private initiative. This is supported by
     industry (88%) and public authorities (63%) but there is less support amongst consumer
     organisations (67% said not at all) and NGO’s (31% support this objective).

     Several rights were deemed important by respondents, including:

            the right to access one's health data in electronic format, including those stored by
             healthcare providers (public or private) (88%), with most support coming from
             consumer organisations (100%), NGO’s (94%), EU citizens (91%), companies
             (86%) trade unions (80%) and public authorities (81%) Lower support was
             recorded among business associations (74%)

            the right to transmit one's health data in electronic format to another
             professional/entity of one's choice (84%), with most support coming from
             consumer organisations (100%), NGO’s (89%) and industry (86%). 85% of EU
             citizens, 86% of companies and 75% of business associations, 75% of public
             authorities, 80% of research institutions and trade unions that participated in the
             public consultation also supported this right.

            the right to request healthcare providers to transmit one's health data in one's
             electronic health record (83%), with most support coming from consumer
             organisations (100%), NGO’s (90%) and EU citizens (82%)

            the right to request public healthcare providers to share electronically one's health
             data with other healthcare providers/entities of one's choice (82%), with most
             support coming from consumer organisations (100%), NGO’s (87%) and EU
             citizens (86%)

            60% of trade unions, 73% of companies, 75% of business associations, 71% of
             public authorities, 54% of EU citizens, 54% of non-EU citizens 61% of NGOs
             64% of research institutions and only 25% of consumer organisations participating
             in the public consultation consider that healthcare professionals should have the
             right to access to patients’ digital health records and to data pertaining to the
             patient’s use of digital health products or services.

     A more contentious question was regarding whether healthcare providers that fail to
     provide access to health data in an electronic format and to transmit it to a healthcare
     provider/entity of their choice are sanctioned or receive a specific fine. There is support
     for this question from consumer organisations (100%) and EU citizens (69%) but there is
     less support amongst companies (66%), business associations (46%), and public
     authorities (31%).

     By far, the element that respondents considered the most appropriate for controlling access
     and sharing one’s health data with healthcare professionals was ensuring the
     infrastructure or personal digital storage for accessing the data are secure and prevent
     cyberattacks (90%). The options of accessing one's health data that is exchanged between
     health professionals or with other entities either:

            via a digital infrastructure (72% support), with most support coming from NGO’s
             (81%), public authorities (75) and industry (70%), with less support from
             consumer organisations (25%)




11
            or via an EU electronic infrastructure (69% support), with most support coming
             from NGO’s (77%), EU citizens (71%) and industry (70%), with less support from
             public authorities (43%)

     The support for facilitating the cross-border delivery of healthcare should be one of the
     objectives of a European framework on the access and exchange of personal health data,
     according to 100% of consumer organisations, 93% of the companies, 84% of business
     associations, 77% of public authorities, 85% of NGOs, 84% of EU citizens, 82% of
     research institutions and 40% of trade unions. Most stakeholders found that the EHDS
     would bring benefits in terms of cross-border access to healthcare, with business
     associations, companies/business organisations and NGO’s being the most likely to say the
     impact would be high (76%, 79% and 77% respectively), compared with only 42% of
     public authorities, and academic/research institutions and EU citizens being the least
     likely. However, the communication concerning the infrastructure MyHealth@EU should
     be improved, as only 23% of EU citizens and 43% of non-EU citizens participating in the
     public consultation were aware about changes concerning data sharing cross border in
     order to ensure the continuity and access to safe and high-quality healthcare; this was the
     case for 53% of public authorities, 47% of companies and 50% of consumer organisations.
     Regarding mandatory participation in an EU-level infrastructure MyHealth@EU,
     Member States have different views. Two Member States consider that waiting for perfect
     coordination of healthcare systems across the EU may take too long, as the differences are
     too great. Instead, the number of services delivered could be gradually increased over time
     as more countries connect and the services improve. The EU should therefore incentivise
     countries to improve their infrastructure, while making participation in the EHDS
     mandatory, since the directive’s objectives will otherwise never be met. According to the
     representative of these two Member States, a continuum of healthcare in the EU is
     necessary to achieve real mobility, and a clear link can be drawn between the EHDS and
     the EU Resilience and Recovery plans.

     Respondents were also asked how standards and technical requirements (e.g. to support the
     exchange of data in healthcare or to ensure the interoperability of health data exchanges)
     should be made applicable at national level and across the EU. Overall, respondents
     believed appropriate measures would be either an access scheme managed by national
     bodies (a mandatory prior approval by a national authority; 39%) or a certification scheme
     granted by third parties (a mandatory independent assessment of the interoperability level;
     37%) would be appropriate most.

     Digital health services and products

     Respondents were asked about how to ensure access to, and sharing of, health data
     nationally and across borders through digital health services and devices.

     85% of the business associations participating in the public consultation and 89% of
     companies consider that EHDS should promote the use of digital health products and
     services by healthcare professional and citizens, while this opinion is shared by 74% of EU
     citizens, 76% of public authorities and only 33% of consumer organisations.

     Support for minimum standards for tele-health equipments established at EU level reaches
     100% among consumer organizations, 75% for trade unions 72% for NGO, 66% for EU
     citizen, 65% for public authorities, 64% for companies and 36% for business associations
     participating in the public consultation. Such support for protocols/rules for tele-health
     established at EU level reaches 75% among consumer organisations, 50% for trade unions,


12
     70% for EU citizens, 65% for public authorities, 60% for research institutions, 59% among
     companies and business organisations and only 26% for the business associations
     participating in the public consultation.

     Overall, a majority of respondents said that it would be useful if citizens were able to
     transmit the data from mHealth and telehealth into their electronic health records (77%
     overall, with most support coming from industry (97%), NGO’s (82%) and EU citizens
     (76%), public authorities (70%)), or, to a smaller extent, into the EU health data exchange
     infrastructure (67% overall, with most support coming from industry (88%), trade unions
     (80%) and NGO’s (71%)). A majority of respondents also said that it would be useful if
     healthcare professionals could request transmission of the data from prescribed apps and
     other digital health services into the electronic health records of the patient (68% overall,
     with most support coming from industry (81%), academia (72%) and NGO’s (71%),
     public authorities (70%)), or, to a lesser extent, if healthcare professionals had the right to
     access patients’ digital health records and data pertaining to the patient’s use of digital
     health products or services (62% overall, with most support coming from industry (75%),
     public authorities (71%) and academia (64%)).

     Overall, respondents believed a certification scheme granted by third parties (a mandatory
     independent assessment of the interoperability level) (52% overall, with most support from
     EU citizens (61%) and trade unions (60%) and less support from public authorities (47%)
     and industry (39%)) would be most appropriate to foster the uptake of digital health
     products and services at national and EU level. A smaller proportion of respondents said
     an authorisation scheme managed by national bodies would be appropriate (43% overall,
     with most support from trade unions (80%), consumer organisations (75%) and less
     support from NGO’s (40%) and industry (12%)). The option of using a voluntary labelling
     scheme was the least popular, with least support from NGO’s (9%) and public authorities
     (18%).

     Respondents believed that the most appropriate measure to support reimbursement
     decisions by national bodies would be a framework where EU funds support/top up cross-
     border digital health services that comply with interoperability standards and ensure
     patient control over their health data (71% overall, with most support coming from
     industry (80%), consumer organisations (75%) and NGO’s (75%)). EU guidelines for
     reimbursement of digital health products get a 100% support among consumer
     organisations, 54% among companies, 46% for EU citizens and only 18% for public
     authorities. Respondents said that other measures would also be appropriate, such as the
     use of an EU repository of digital health products and services assessed according to EU
     guidelines to aid national bodies to make reimbursement decisions, or a framework which
     facilitates reimbursement of all telehealth services (64% overall, with most support coming
     from consumer organisations (100%), trade unions (80%) and NGO’s (72%), and a more
     limited 49% support from public authorities).

     Mutual recognition across EU for reimbursement purposes is supported by 100% of
     consumer organisations, 69% of NGOs63% of EU citizens, 75% of companies, 46% of
     business assoeciations, 36% of public authorities (a similar percentage of authorities
     opposing it) participating in the public consultation.

     When inquired who would be the best suited to develop these standards and technical
     requirements at EU level to support exchange of data in healthcare, responses were mixed.
     40% of respondents in the public consultation believed 'national digital health bodies
     cooperating at EU level' are best suited to develop standards and technical requirements at
     EU level to support the exchange of data in healthcare. More than a third of respondents

13
     (125 out of 363, 34%) said that 'an EU body' might instead be best suited to do this. There
     were some differences across stakeholder types, in particular between public authorities
     (71% in favour of national digital health bodies, and only 12% in favour of an EU body)
     and companies/business organisations (only 24% in favour of national digital health
     bodies, but 59% in favour of an EU body).
     A relatively large proportion of respondents thought another type of body would be best
     suited to develop standards and technical requirements at EU level to support the exchange
     of data in healthcare (93 out of 363, 26%). Among these, some suggested that there should
     be a combination of both national digital health bodies and an EU body. Several
     mentioned they believed 'an EU body' might be best suited to develop standards and
     technical requirements at EU level to support the exchange of data in healthcare, but that
     this EU body should meet some requirements. For example, it should involve scientific
     experts with thorough knowledge of diseases, as well as representatives from patient
     organisations, Member States' national institutions, private sector consortia and academic
     institutes.

     With regards to the costs of complying with standards, across the stakeholder groups,
     62% of academic/research institutions and 53% of public authorities expected this cost
     impact to be high, compared with only 21% of business associations and 23% of
     companies/business organisations.

     A large majority of respondents said they believed access to EU funds for digitalisation
     in healthcare by Member States should be conditional upon ensuring interoperability with
     electronic health records and national healthcare systems (81%). Only 8% disagreed, and
     the rest said they did not know.

     Access and use of personal health data for research and innovation, policy-making and
     regulatory decision-making

     Among Member States that participated in the public consultation, some upheld that
     legislation on data authorization should remain at country level, although it recognized a
     need for a European body to coordinate authorization with Member States, such that only
     one procedure would have to be taken by any research institution looking to access a
     dataset. Others would welcome the creation of a portal for accessing data at EU level,
     which would not host any data, but would hold the keys to all the datasets stored
     elsewhere. With the development of a common health data space, more Member States are
     also planning to set up a national data permit authority. A big Member State in the process
     of setting up a data access body agreed that having a clear mandate of EU data access rules
     would be very beneficial, and the EHDS should contain legislation compelling Member
     States to grant data to researchers in other EU countries. Moreover, algorithms should be
     trained across countries to ensure sufficient quantity and diversity of data.
     Concerning the participation in the EU infrastructure on secondary use of data, the
     views of Member States were more heterogenous. Some Member States were in favour of
     mandatory participation in EHDS infrastructure for secondary use, but pointed out that it
     could also be optional in use, with a seal of quality reassuring citizens about their data’s
     use. Others underlined that, while some have made progress regarding the establishment of
     a health data authority, the situation in other Member States may be different as they may
     not have the same capacity to join. Therefore, making participation mandatory will not
     necessarily increase progress, and investments should be made into capacity building to
     bring all countries’ infrastructure to the same level. A federal Member State mentioned
     that a discussion should also take place on how to ensure that the right technical and


14
     organizational measures to ensure maximum data protection are being used while allowing
     maximum research.

     Support decisions by policy-makers and regulators in health as an objective of a European
     framework on the access and exchange of personal health data should is supported
     completed or to a great extent by 82% of academic and research organisations, 80% of
     trade unions, 81% of companies and business associations, 83% of NGOs, 69% of EU
     citizens, 57% of non-EU citizens, 65% of public authorities and 50% of consumer
     organisations participation in the public consultation.

     The objective of supporting and accelerating research in health is supported by 100% of
     consumer organisations and non-EU citizens, 83% of EU citizens, 97% of business
     associations, 95% of companies, 94% of research institutions, 88% of public authorities,
     80% of trade unions and 90% of NGOs.

     Promoting private initiatives (e.g. for innovation and commercial use) in digital health has
     received a more mixed support: 88% from business associations that participated in the
     open publc consultation, 79% of companies, 60% of trade unions, 29% of non EU citizens
     and 38% of EU citizens, 63% of public authorities, 47% of research institutions, 31% of
     NGO that participated in the public consultation. 67% of the consumer organisations that
     participated in the public consultation are against a European framework on the access and
     exchange of personal health data that would promote private initiatives (e.g. for innovation
     and commercial use).

     Only a small proportion of respondents said a fee would facilitate the sharing of health
     data held by private stakeholders (20%), while many highlighted the limitations of using
     this incentive (e.g. difficult to manage, not stimulating enough to share data etc.) and a few
     said it would have a negative impact (e.g. potentially endangering patient interest by
     commercialising health data). A federal Member State also highlighted that no profit
     should be made from the data, however a fee system should control the amount of
     permissions to be granted to limit the burden on the system and support the sustainability
     of the system. Moreover, it would support the establishment of a transparency registry
     where all granted permissions would be published, and of a website showing how the data
     was used, to enhance public trust. Many respondents said that other types of incentives
     would facilitate the sharing of health data held by private stakeholders, such as:
     legal/mandatory obligations, and greater interoperability between systems, databases and
     registries or a more transparent system for sharing data.

     The mechanism that respondents thought most appropriate to facilitate the access to health
     data for research, innovation, policy-making and regulatory decision was the mandatory
     appointment of a national body that authorises access to health data by third parties (55%)
     (deemed more appropriate than the voluntary appointment of such a body), followed by
     the use of a public body which collects the consent of individuals to share their health data
     for specified societal uses (“data altruism”) and manages their health data (47%).

     Overall, respondents thought additional rules on conditions for access to health data for
     research, innovation, policy-making and regulatory decision would be needed at EU level,
     mainly for research purposes, and for policy and regulatory purposes (when asked about
     health data categories, format, eligibility and security).

     The two options that respondents said were most appropriate in facilitating access to health
     data held by private stakeholders was to have access to health data granted by a national
     body (rather than by the data holder), either subject to the agreement of data subjects (most


15
     support from industry (57%), least support from public authorities (24%)), or in
     accordance with national law (most support from public authorities (65%), least support
     from industry (21%)). Only a small proportion of respondents said a fee would facilitate
     the sharing of health data held by private stakeholders (20%), while many highlighted the
     limitations of using this incentive (e.g. difficult to manage, not stimulating enough to share
     data etc.) and a few said it would have a negative impact (e.g. potentially endangering
     patient interest by commercialising health data). Many respondents said that other types of
     incentives would facilitate the sharing of health data held by private stakeholders, such as:
     legal/mandatory obligations, and greater interoperability between systems, databases and
     registries or a more transparent system for sharing data.

     A large majority of respondents said an EU body could facilitate access to health data for
     research, innovation, policy making and regulatory decisions if it had a number of
     functions, the most important ones being: setting standards on interoperability together
     with national bodies dealing with secondary use of health data (87% overall, most support
     from consumer organisations (100%), NGO’s (92%) and industry (91%)); bringing
     together the national bodies dealing with secondary use of health data, for decisions in this
     area (79% overall, most support coming from consumer organisations (100%), NGO’s
     (89%) and trade unions (80%)); and facilitating cross-border queries to locate relevant
     datasets in collaboration with national bodies dealing with secondary use of health data
     (78% overall, most support coming from consumer organisations (100%), NGO’s (87%)
     and academia (84%)).

     Overall, respondents believed the mandatory use of specific technical requirements and
     standards would be most useful to address interoperability and data quality issues for
     facilitating cross-border access to health data for research, innovation, policy-making and
     regulatory decision (67% overall, with most support coming from consumer organisations
     (100%), academia (82%) and least support from industry (48%)). A smaller proportion of
     respondents said using an audit, certification or access before participating in EHDS cross-
     border infrastructure would be appropriate (59% overall, most support coming from EU
     citizens (75%), consumer organisations (75%) and least support from industry (33%)).

     Artificial Intelligence (AI) in healthcare

     To facilitate the sharing and use of data sets for the development and testing of AI in
     healthcare, respondents recommended allowing access to health data by AI manufacturers
     for the development and testing of AI systems in a secure way (including compliance with
     GDPR rules), by bodies established within the EHDS (65% overall, with most support
     coming from industry (82%), trade unions (80%) and public authorities (70%) with least
     support from consumer organisations (25%)).

     A majority of respondents believed the introduction of AI in healthcare is creating a new
     relationship between the AI system, the healthcare professional and the patient (69%).
     While some thought this relationship was positive (bringing positive changes such as
     acceleration and optimisation of care as well as the fostering of research and discoveries),
     others said this would have downsides (e.g. worsening the level of trust between
     physicians and patients, or decreasing patient confidence in the solutions proposed).

     To ensure collaboration and education between AI developers and healthcare
     professionals, a large majority of respondents agreed that healthcare professionals and/or
     providers should demonstrate understanding of the potentials and limitations in using AI
     systems, including 66% of business associations, 89% of NGOs and 82% of public
     authorities

16
         2. Assessment of the EU Member States Rules on health data in light of GDPR

     The study9 examined the rules governing the processing of health data, highlighting
     differences, identifying elements that might affect the cross border exchange of health data
     and examining potential for EU action to support health data use and reuse. The study was
     carried out between the end of 2019 and the beginning of 2021.

     During the study, 5 workshops took place with Ministries of Health representatives,
     experts, stakeholder representatives and experts from national data protection offices 10. A
     stakeholder survey was also carried out to cross validate and supplement the topics
     addressed and identified. In total, 543 persons responded to the online survey19%
     respondents were health professionals, 1% health insurers, 11% healthcare providers, 11%
     citizens, 15% patient organisations, 15% public administration, 20% scientific research
     and 1% others.

     A number of legal and operational issues need to be addressed to ensure that European
     healthcare systems can make best possible use of health data. Variations in interpretation
     of GDPR has led to a fragmented approach which makes cross-border cooperation
     difficult. Only 52% of respondents consider that it is easy for a patient to access his/her
     medical records and 42% to obtain a portable copy of their medical record to take to
     another healthcare provider in the same country (even less, 28% when it comes to sharing
     with a healthcare provider in another country). 73% of consulted stakeholders believe that
     having health data in a personal data space or patient portal facilitates the transfer between
     healthcare providers. There is a high consensus (87%) that lack of data portability drives
     up costs through repeating testing and examination, slows down time to diagnosis and
     treatment (84%) and can limit the rights of Europeans to seek care in another EU country
     (79%). Low interoperability is considered the main cause for preventing data sharing for
     healthcare provision at national level by 70% of respondents and by 83% between EU
     countries. 81% of respondents considers that additional measures should be taken at EU
     level to enforce patients’ control over their own health data and portability of this data,
     including though legislation (84%).

     81% of stakeholders consider that the use of different GDPR legal basis (consent,
     provision of care, public interest) make it difficult for health related data to be shared for
     public health purposes between EU countries, 76% agree that such sharing is hampered by
     differences in datasets and 70% believe that this is also made difficult by datasets scattered
     over many healthcare providers. 79% believe that epidemiological institutions should have
     easier and direct access to health data (and 71% for medicine agencies, medical devices
     and HTA bodies) and 85% consider that EU should support this (80% for medicine
     agencies, medical devices and HTA bodies). 75% of respondents are convinced that one
     should facilitate direct reporting of national and regional public health authorities to public
     health institutions dealing with epidemiological aspects, without going through a reporting
     cascade. 71% believe that one should set up an EU level system allowing patients to make
     data available for research without reference to a particular research project (data altruism)


     9
         Hansen, J., Wilson, P., Verhoeven, E., Kroneman, M., Kirwan, M., Verheij, R., van Veen, E.-B. (2021). Assessment of
            the EU Member States rules on health data in the light of GDPR. https://ec.europa.eu/health/system/files/2021-
            02/ms_rules_health-data_en_0.pdf (Annexes available at: https://ec.europa.eu/health/system/files/2021-
            02/ms_rules_health-data_annex_en_0.pdf).
     10
          More details in Hansen et al. (2021).




17
     and the same percentage believe that such a data altruism system should be also used for
     pandemics. 71% of respondents believe that the time and interaction costs of gaining
     access to health data for research are high and 86% plea that EU should support the
     processing of health data for scientific or historical research or statistical purposes by
     legislation; 81% suggest that EU should promote the use of the same legal base of sharing
     health data for research purposes and provide EU level guidance on obtaining the consent
     from patients for sharing data (86%).

     82% of respondents believe that EU should support Member States to put in place
     structures allowing for secondary use of health data for policy making and research,
     including by legislation. 79% support a single point of contact for the use of health data for
     research in all Member States and 80% believe that all single points should be linked at
     EU level, to support pan-European research. 70% consider that one single point of contact
     should also be set up at EU level, in addition to national ones. The support for data
     altruism (make patients data available without reference to a particular research project) is
     high (72%), for both national and EU level and 78% consider that EU should support
     Member States to set up structures for managing such systems (78%) or such governance
     should be set up at EU level (76%). With regards to infrastructure for secondary use of
     health data, 69% of respondents support a structure linking the one entry points/Health
     Data Access Bodies of different countries, other research infrastructures and data sources
     at EU level, slightly ahead of a structure intermediating access to health data (a body
     where a request for access to existing health data can be put forward and managed) (68%).
     58% of respondents consider that such an infrastructure should be set up at the level of an
     EU agency, followed by an EU committee (43%). Only 4% consider that a common model
     for health data sharing has no added value.

     Action at EU level is supported in several areas: anonymizing/pseudonymising health data
     (90%); use of open exchange formats (86%), data quality and reliability through the use of
     standards (90%), health related cybersecurity standards (89%), minimum datasets for data
     exchange (81%). When it comes to EU action, legislation (67%) is support more than
     Codes of Conduct put together by representatives of all relevant national authorities (59%)
     of by a board of stakeholders (59%).

     The stakeholder consultations contributed to the identification of future EU level actions in
     the area of governance, legislation, support for digitalisation, interoperability and digital
     infrastructures.

     3. Study on Health Data, Digital Health and Artificial Intelligence in Healthcare

     The study, which was carried out between September 2020 and August 2021, provides
     evidence needed to enable informed policy making in the areas of digital health products
     and services, AI, the governance on the use of health data and the evaluation of Article 14
     of the CBHC Directive.

     The consultation activities included 28 interviews, 9 focus groups and 2 online surveys.
     Relevant stakeholders identified and contacted were eHealth Network members and
     coordinators of Joint Actions supporting the eHealth Network and the European Health
     Data Space; national bodies (Ministries of Health, eHealth agencies, National Medicines
     Agencies); EU institutions (European Commission, European Medicines Agency, ECDC);
     patients organisations; healthcare professionals organisations; organisations representing
     the industry (e.g. medical devices industry) and individual companies (digital industry,
     pharmaceutical industry, medical devices industry) as well as individual experts (scholars,
     researcher, etc.).

18
     The stakeholders support measures in a number of areas, ranging from guidance on digital
     health services and products quality, interoperability, reimbursement, identification and
     authentication, digital literacy and skills. On primary use, stakeholders support mandating
     national digital health authorities with tasks to support cross-border provision of digital
     health and access to health data. In addition, they also support expansion of the services of
     MyHealth@EU. There is also support for giving patients the right to portability of their
     electronic health records in an interoperable format.

     On secondary use, there is support for the introduction of a legal and governance
     framework, building on the establishment of Health Data Access Bodies in a number of
     Member States, with cooperation at EU level through a network or an advisory group. To
     reduce barriers, there would be support for specifications and standards.

      4. Study on an infrastructure and data ecosystem supporting the impact assessment
         of the European Health Data Space11

     The study, which was carried out between April 2021 and December 2021, aims to present
     evidence-based insights that will support the impact assessment of options for a European
     digital health infrastructure. The study identifies, characterises and assesses options for a
     digital infrastructure, outlines cost-effectiveness, provides data on the expected impacts,
     both for the primary and the secondary use of health data.

     A total of 18 interactive workshops were conducted covering 65 stakeholders who
     actively engage with health data usage. Their background varies from Ministries of Health,
     digital health authorities, National Contact Points for eHealth, health data research
     infrastructures, regulatory agencies, Health Data Access Bodies, healthcare providers,
     patients and advocacy groups.

     In addition, a survey focusing on costs was developed, including questions related to the
     value, benefits, impact and cost of different options. The objective was to refine the
     principles and options that were identified during the study. The survey was targeting four
     stakeholder groups: National Contact Points for eHealth, Digital Health Authorities or
     Ministries of Health, Health Data Research Infrastructures and EU Health regulatory,
     surveillance or policy making agencies, and finally national Health Data Access Bodies or
     access bodies.

     The stakeholder consultations were focused on gathered input regarding three key
     infrastructure options for the infrastructure for primary uses of health data, for secondary
     uses of health data and for a potential European Health Data Access Body (EHDAB).
     These options are depicted in the figure below.




     11
          European Commission (forthcoming study). A study on an infrastructure and data ecosystem supporting
            the impact assessment of the European Health Data Space, Trasys.




19
                                        Figure 1. Over of infrastructure options.

     Option 1 considers extending the current infrastructure for primary uses of health data
     (MyHealth@EU) with capabilities to support secondary uses of health data. In the figure,
     the lower plane shows the network of NCPeHs in MyHealth@EU which would also
     connect Health Data Access Bodies12. While this option could facilitate the sustainability
     of MyHealth@EU, several stakeholders suggested against mixing given the complexity of
     mixing both networks (primary and secondary), as their functions are inherently different
     at national level (while NCPeHs act as gateways to synchronously transmit health data
     across Member States, Health Data Access Bodies have specific functions related to
     providing access to health data to third parties). Participants indicated that Option 1 is
     highly complex and possibly unrealistic due to different governance rules, technical
     requirements/solutions and use cases, and modes of access, privacy and data quality issues
     and lack of collaboration between NCPeHs and Health Data Access Bodies.

     Option 2 considers directly connecting Health Data Access Bodies through a federated
     (distributed) network at EU level, which would facilitate communication and limit
     disruption in the existing infrastructure (MyHealth@EU) and would be the preferred
     option. A total of 45% participants in the consultations stated that Option 2 is the less
     complex of the three presented options. Specifically, it was considered ‘the most
     appropriate for public health’, ‘more desirable/preferrable’ and ‘the simpler,’ as it can be
     established with low deployment costs.

     Option 3 would rely on the EHDAB as the central gateway to process multi-country
     requests and connect national Health Data Access Bodies at EU level. This third option
     would come at a substantial cost for the EU as it would require the deployment of
     heavyweight infrastructure centrally. Option 3 was recognised by 29% of participants as
     the most complex option, although 17% recognised that a European unified framework
     would reduce local heterogeneity and lead to a more 'harmonised' European digital health
     data environment with ‘the highest impact for the competitiveness of Europe in the data



     12
          In the figure, Health Data Access Bodies are indicated as “DPerA”s for “Data Permit Authority” instead of
             “Data Access Body”.




20
     economy’. In order for this option to function, more regulation, structure and EU
     governance would be required.

     This study also investigated the future development of MyHealth@EU. Regarding this,
     healthcare professionals attach high importance to services such as patient summaries,
     ePrescription and critical analysis. For patients, they attach high importance to all services
     allowing access and sharing of health data. For researchers and policy makers, they attach
     high importance to services facilitating access to health data for reuse.

     Across all participants that took part in the workshops and survey, a total of 24 were asked
     about the potential implementation challenges they expect in relation to the three presented
     health infrastructure options. Out of these participants, 16 responded to this question.
     Overall, the data indicate that the implementation challenges depend on the exact functions
     and roles associated with each infrastructure option. The biggest challenges identified
     when attempting to specify a technological infrastructure ecosystem relate to:
           Interoperability: technical, data, and semantic barrier in the use of different
            classifications, code lists, terminologies and languages.
           Measures and information about quality in the data: data quality and validation
            are necessary.
           Leveraging existing projects and initiatives: the challenge would be to reuse
            existing infrastructures, services and structures.
           Legal barriers: variability between EU Member States in the implementation of
            GDPR, standards on health data sharing, data processing ethical use of data, data
            transfers.
     A number of participants expressed the opinion that anonymised or pseudonymised data
     could be sufficient to enable health data reuse. However, there are cases where research
     may need access to identifiable and personal medical data, e.g. where linkages across
     databases is needed.

     Interoperability and the use of common data models and standards are necessary for the
     reuse of data across datasets. On common data models, users were split between the
     development of a common data model with refined granularity, lightweight formats and
     models with clear semantics for data integration or a combined approach.

     In relation to when data mapping should occur in the infrastructure, although ‘an upfront
     exercise would be useful if it is reliably implemented’, it is more realistic to trigger the
     mapping upon project authorisation or on demand. Mapping all data to the chosen
     common data model upfront might be complex and time-consuming due to the depth of the
     mapping and the evolving nature of study needs. Other participants explained that they
     foresee multiple complementary approaches, such as mapping to a common data model
     upfront and on-demand mapping as part of the project authorisation. In any case, the
     common model would need to be agreed upon.

     Some participants explained that they expect the data alignment and mapping to be
     necessary for the research infrastructures working with different national datasets, while
     others foresee a mixed model with a small, core set of variables being aligned and mapped
     across Member States and data providers. Other stakeholders see an added value on the
     data alignment and mapping across Member States for comparability. A few participants
     expected the EHDS infrastructure to support analytics on identified data to
     validate/demonstrate the AI model quality. However, ‘ensuring quality would be a major
     effort’.

21
     In terms of data storage provisions, participants showed preference for a mixed model as
     ‘the complexity of the data is pushing more towards a federated model where data can stay
     in place and the code tools can be deployed on co-located infrastructure’. Participants
     foresee data refreshes, where relevant, and at cases there is a need for both mechanisms
     but perhaps, as explained, there is no need for active tracking or monitoring for science
     use-cases.

     Actors working on registries or national data access bodies mentioned interoperability as
     the main challenges, while stakeholders working in the research field and national data
     access bodies also flagged issues with the measurement and information about data
     quality. Advocacy groups also mentioned the importance of leveraging existing projects
     and initiatives, while health data research infrastructures, regulatory, surveillance and
     policy agencies mentioned legal barriers, such as variations in the implementation of
     GDPR.

     5. Impact Assessment Study

     The study, which was carried out between June 2021 and December 2021, aims to present
     evidence-based insights that will support the impact assessment of options for the EHDS.
     The study defines and assesses the overall policy options for the EHDS, building upon the
     evidence gathered in the previous studies.

     The study analyses the results of the public consultation (see above), which was open
     between May and July 2021, and relies on desk research, targeted consultations and
     qualitative and quantitative analyses of collected data.




22
     ANNEX 3: WHO IS AFFECTED AND HOW?

     5    1.                    PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS OF THE INITIATIVE

     The planned legislative framework will have a range of practical implications for different
     stakeholders. In this section, the practical implications for patients, healthcare providers,
     digital health authorities, researchers and digital health industry are briefly addressed.

     There is a wide variety of uses and reuses of health data by different stakeholders that the
     EHDS could support. Table 1 shows some examples of use cases by different stakeholders.

     Table 1. Examples of use cases of use and reuse of health data by different stakeholders.

     Stakeholders Primary use of health data                        Secondary use of health data
     Patients/     Access to their health data online,              Participation to research projects and
     citizens      including through mobile apps.                   clinical trials.
                   Control over the use of their data, such as      Participation to patient communities
                   authorisation to access data or the              and data cooperatives producing data
                   transmission of health data to healthcare        in specific contexts, such as in
                   providers of their choice.                       connection with disease groups.
                   Use of telehealth services and online            Data altruism.
                   pharmacies.
                   Recording Patient Reported Outcomes to
                   measure health and wellness outcomes of
                   treatment.
     Healthcare    Review of patient’s medical history from         Individual healthcare delivery using
     professionals one or multiple sources, for planning            data concerning other patients with
                   healthcare delivery, ensuring continuity         comparable conditions.
                   of care, patient safety and monitoring
                   healthcare outcomes.
                   Entry of relevant data for documenting
                   healthcare encounters.
                   Use of decision support systems.
                   Dispensation of electronic prescriptions.
     Health        n/a                                              Use of health data for the purposes of
     researchers                                                    their research projects.
                                                                    Confirmation or reproduction of
                                                                    research outcomes.
                                                                    Reuse of data from previously
                                                                    conducted research projects.
     Industry         n/a                                           Use of (aggregated) health data for
                                                                    research and development purposes
                                                                    (e.g. medicinal products, medical
                                                                    devices, AI algorithms).
     Policy-          n/a                                           Analysis and improvement of quality
     makers                                                         and efficiency of healthcare processes.
                                                                    Planning of improvements in the
                                                                    organisation of the healthcare system,
                                                                    preparation of legislative reform.
     Regulators       n/a                                           Carrying out regulatory activities
                                                                    based on real-world evidence (e.g.
                                                                    monitoring the long-term effects of
                                                                    medicinal products, beyond the data
                                                                    submitted by manufacturers in the
                                                                    context of authorisation).



23
     The initiative will benefit patients, healthcare providers and researchers in a number of
     ways. Patients will have greater control over their health data, whenever and wherever
     they want, giving them greater autonomy and freedom to receive care wherever they are.
     They will be able to grant access to healthcare providers of their choice, giving greater
     control to patients. Healthcare providers will enjoy enhanced access to health data in an
     electronic, interoperable format. Healthcare providers will find that they spend less time
     copying data from different data sources in different formats, saving them a lot of time,
     thus improving healthcare systems efficiency. Researchers, innovators and policy makers
     will enjoy enhanced access to health data in a standardised format, with transparency on
     data quality and with an infrastructure supporting their needs.

     Digital health authorities will work towards making their infrastructure and their
     solutions interoperable across borders. This has practical implications for the design and
     configuration of their work, which will be impacted by EU-level decision making (binding
     decision-making through delegated and implementing acts). The digital health authorities
     will work to expand the services of MyHealth@EU to cover a larger group of end-users.
     eID requirements will become mandatory and will require digital health authorities to
     introduce the necessary measures, making it possible to support an ecosystem of trust,
     where users of digital health solutions can safely grant access to health data.

     Member States will be mandated to appoint a national health Data Access Body (DAB),
     working on the basis of the EHDS mandate and binding decision-making (delegated /
     implementing acts). Certain categories of health data will be made available through the
     EHDS legal base, which will make more health data available for re-use for researchers,
     policy makers, regulators and innovators. The NHDAB will become part of a mandatory
     federated European infrastructure. Data sources will be required to fulfil a mandatory data
     quality label and should support algorithm training and validation for certain user groups.

     Through the services provided by the NHDABs, user groups such as researchers, policy-
     makers, regulators and innovators will have services at their disposal that will facilitate
     the development of innovative digital health solutions to better serve the needs of the
     healthcare systems and patients.

     With more health data available for reuse, researchers will be able to better develop
     improved prevention, diagnosis and treatment services together with healthcare providers
     and industry. Regulators and policy-makers will have more health data available to build
     on real-world evidence to improve the functioning of the healthcare system. This will
     improve the health outcomes for patients and the public at large.

     Digital health industry will find that the initiative creates a level playing field through
     standardisation and the promotion of interoperability across borders, which will promote
     the uptake of digital health software solutions across borders. The practical implications
     for industry are that they are able to prove their solutions are interoperable and meet
     common requirements, which will help make the solutions easier to use for end-users
     across borders.

     6   2.                  SUMMARY OF COSTS AND BENEFITS

     The figures cited in the tables below illustrate the costs under the preferred option in
     relation to its specific elements for different types of stakeholders. They are based on the
     assessment of costs and benefits as part of the study supporting this impact assessment,
     conducted by a consortium led by ICF. The overall methodology used in the study to



24
     estimate the baseline scenario, as well as the impacts of the policy options, are provided in
     Annex 5.

     Table 2. Overview of Benefits for the Preferred Option (above the baseline and over 10 years).


     I. Overview of Benefits (total for all provisions) – Preferred Option


     Description                 Amount                                      Comments


     Direct benefits


     Cost      savings   and EUR 5.4 billion (EUR 58.9 saved per Savings stemming from higher uptake
     efficiency gains in the patient per year)                   of telemedicine assuming traditional
     healthcare sector                                           medicine costs EUR 68.9 per patient
                                                                 per year while only EUR 10 if using
                                                                 telemedicine


     Cost savings in the EUR 173-232 million                                 Savings originating from faster
     cross-border provision                                                  deployment       of     cross-border
     of health services                                                      ePrescription and medical imaging
                                                                             services through MyHealth@EU


     Efficiency   gains    in EUR 0.8 billion                                The use of real-world evidence in
     accessing health data by                                                policy-making in health can yield
     researchers         and                                                 substantial savings thanks to greater
     innovators                                                              transparency of the effectiveness of
                                                                             medicinal products resulting in more
                                                                             efficient regulatory processes


     Cost savings in the EUR 3.4 billion                                     Savings for researchers, innovators,
     reuse of health data                                                    regulators     and      policy-makers,
     access                                                                  originating from not having to reach
                                                                             directly the data subjects to further
                                                                             process their health data and from
                                                                             instead relying on access granted by
                                                                             national health data access bodies


     Increased   value      of EUR 1.2 billion                               Value generated thanks to more
     health data                                                             intensive and extensive health data
                                                                             sharing    supporting     data-driven
                                                                             innovation and regulatory and policy-
                                                                             making processes in health


     Indirect benefits


     Contribution to the Faster growth expected at 20%-30% and
     growth of the digital 15%-20% per year, respectively
     health and wellness
     applications markets




25
     Reduction     of non- 26%                                           Based on the estimate of the current
     dispensation rate for                                               non-dispensation rate (46%)
     cross-border
     prescriptions


     Availability          of Non-quantifiable due to lack of data       Citizens, healthcare professionals and
     innovative       medical                                            providers would be able to benefit
     products     based   on                                             from innovative medical products
     health data use and                                                 based on health data use and reuse
     reuse


     Table 3. Overview of costs for the Preferred Option (above the baseline).


     II. Overview of costs – Preferred option


                                   One-off      Recurrent    One-off     Recurrent      One-off   Recurrent


                                   National digital health   Health Data Access
                     Concerned     authorities and the       Bodies and the
                     parties       Commission (primary       Commission (secondary
                                   uses)                     uses)


                                   -            EUR 1.3-2.0 -            EUR 1.3-
     Governance                                 million/year             2.0
     of the EHDS                                                         million/year
     (including
     preparation                                                         EUR 1.0-
     of                                                                  3.0
     requirements,                                                       million/year
     assessment                                                          invested for
     frameworks     Direct costs                                         actions
     and                                                                 promoting
     guidelines,                                                         interoperab
     both for                                                            ility, data
     primary and                                                         altruism
     secondary                                                           and the
     uses of health                                                      developmen
     data)                                                               t of AI in
                                                                         health


                     Indirect      -            -            -           -
                     costs


                   Concerned Member States’
     Establishmen parties       authorities
     t and
     operation of
     health data
     access bodies Direct costs EUR 1-3     EUR 0.5-
                                million for 1.5
                                each        million/yea
                                health      r for each
                                data        health data



26
                                 access      access
                                 body (not body
                                 considerin
                                 g secure
                                 clouds and
                                 infrastruct
                                 ure, which
                                 may be
                                 shared
                                 with other
                                 bodies
                                 under
                                 Article 7
                                 of the
                                 DGA)


                    Indirect     -            -
                    costs


                                 National digital health
                    Concerned
                                 authorities and
                    parties
                                 European Commission


                    Direct costs EUR 0.8- EUR 0.5-1
                                 2.5 million million for
                                 for the     the
                                 deploymen maintenanc
                                 t of each   e of each
                                 new         MyHealth@
                                 NCPeH       EU generic
     Expansion of                (for new    service
     the EU                      Member
     infrastructure              States      EUR 7
     for primary                 only;       million for
     uses of health              shared)     the central
     data                                    services of
     (MyHealth@                  EUR 0.3- MyHealth@
     EU)                         1.0 million EU
                                 for the     (Commissio
                                 implement n only)
                                 ation of
                                 each new
                                 service for
                                 at a
                                 NCPeH
                                 (shared)


                    Indirect     -           -             -            -
                    costs


                                 Citizens, healthcare      Digital health products   Digital health
                    Concerned
                                 professionals/providers   manufacturers obtaining   authorities
                    parties
     Mandatory                                             the label
     third-party




27
     certification
                                    -           -             EUR          (Recertifica -           Monitoring
     for EHR
                                                              20,000-      tion                     of market
     systems
                                                              50,000       estimated at             and
                                                                           80% of                   guidance
                     Direct costs
                                                                           certification            on label
                                                                           cost every 5             (included in
                                                                           years)                   governance
                                                                                                    costs)


                     Indirect       -           -             -            -            -           -
                     costs


                                    Citizens, healthcare      Digital health products   Digital health
                     Concerned
                                    professionals/providers   manufacturers obtaining   authorities
                     parties
                                                              the label


     Mandatory
                                    -           -             EUR          (Recertifica -           Monitoring
     third-party
                                                              20,000-      tion                     of market
     certification
                                                              50,000       estimated at             and
     for digital
                                                                           80% of                   guidance
     health          Direct costs
                                                                           certification            on label
     products
                                                                           cost every 5             (included in
     (medical
                                                                           years)                   governance
     devices
                                                                                                    costs)
     feeding into
     EHRs)
                     Indirect       -           -             -            -            -           -
                     costs


                                    Citizens, healthcare      Mobile wellness           Digital health
                     Concerned
                                    professionals/providers   applications developers   authorities
                     parties
                                                              obtaining the label


                     Direct costs -             -             EUR 1,500- Non-         -             Monitoring
                                                              3,000      quantifiable               of market
                                                                         costs due to               (non-
     Voluntary
                                                                         lack of data               quantifiable
     self-declared
                                                                                                    )
     quality label
     for wellness
                                                                                                    Guidance
     applications
                                                                                                    on label
                                                                                                    (included in
                                                                                                    governance
                                                                                                    costs)


                     Indirect       -           -             -            -            -           -
                     costs


     Development Concerned          Health Data Access        European Commission
     and           parties          Bodies
     deployment of




28
     the EU
                    Direct costs   EUR 0.8- EUR 0.2-0.8 EUR 3            EUR 6-7
     infrastructure
                                   2.8 million million for million for   million for
     for secondary
                                   for the     yearly      the           the
     uses of health
                                   deploymen maintenanc deployment       maintenanc
     data
                                   t of        e           of a node     e for
                                   infrastruct             for an EU     central
                                   ure                     body          services
                                   required                              and nodes
                                   per data                EUR 25        of EU
                                   access                  million for   bodies
                                   body to                 the
                                   connect to              deployment
                                   the EHDS                of central
                                   infrastruct             services
                                   ure


                    Indirect       -          -            -             -
                    costs


                    Concerned      Data holders            Health data access bodies Data reusers
                    parties


                    Direct costs EUR        -              -             Monitoring -           Increased
                                 7,000-                                  and                    costs in
                                 17,000 for                              enforcemen             data access
                                 obtaining                               t costs                due to
                                 the data                                (non-                  increased
     Data quality                quality                                 quantifiable           data quality
     label                       label                                   due to lack            (non-
                                                                         of                     quantifiable
                                                                         information            due to lack
                                                                         )                      of
                                                                                                information
                                                                                                )


                    Indirect       -          -            -             -             -        -
                    costs




29
     Table 4. Costs, benefits and benefit-cost ratio for the considered policy options (costs and benefits are
     shown in EUR billion, except for the ratio; costs and benefits for the policy options shown as above the
     baseline; in order to maximise the possible range of costs-benefit ration, this was calculated by dividing the
     lower bound benefit by upper bound costs and of higher bound benefit by lower bound costs).

                                                               Costs         Benefits          Benefit-Cost ratio
     Policy Option 1                         Primary uses      (+) 0.1-0.3   (+) 0.4-0.5       1.4-5.1
                                             Secondary         (+) 0.3-0.5   (+) 2.8           5.3-9.5
                                             uses
                                             Total             (+) 0.4-0.9   (+) 3.3           3.8-8.5
     Policy Option 2                         Primary uses      (+) 0.2-1.2   (+) 5.5-5.6       4.7-30.2
                                             Secondary         (+) 0.4-0.7   (+) 5.4           7.3-15.4
                                             uses
                                             Total             (+) 0.5-1.9   (+) 11.0          5.7-20.5
     Policy Option 2+ (certification for     Primary uses      (+) 0.3-1.8   (+) 5.5-5.6       3.1-17.0
     EHRs and digital health products/       Secondary         (+) 0.4-0.7   (+) 5.4           7.3-15.4
     services; voluntary labelling for       uses
     mobile wellness applications)           Total             (+) 0.7-2.6   (+) 11.0          4.3-16.2
     Policy Option 3 (EU governance by       Primary uses      (+) 0.7-3.1   (+) 5.5-5.6       1.8-8.5
     existing EU body)                       Secondary         (+) 0.5-1.0   (+) 6.1           5.9-11.3
                                             uses
                                             Total             (+) 1.2-4.1   (+) 11.6-11.7     2.9-9.8
     Policy Option 3+ (EU governance by      Primary uses      (+) 0.9-3.4   (+) 5.5-5.6       1.7-5.9
     new EU body)                            Secondary         (+) 0.5-1.0   (+) 6.1           5.9-11.3
                                             uses
                                             Total             (+) 1.5-4.4   (+) 11.6-11.7     2.7-7.9




30
     ANNEX 4: GRAPHICAL REPRESENTATION OF DIFFERENT ELEMENTS IN THE IMPACT
            ASSESSMENT13




                           Figure 2. User perspectives on the use and reuse of health data.




                                          Figure 3. Overview of problems.




     13
          European Commission (forthcoming study). A study on an infrastructure and data ecosystem supporting
            the impact assessment of the European Health Data Space, Trasys.




31
     Figure 4. Preferred option for primary use of health data.




32
                            Figure 5. Preferred option for secondary use.




     Figure 6. Federated infrastructure architecture for the EHDS for primary uses of health data
                      (MyHealth@EU) (same architecture for all policy options).




33
     Figure 7. Federated infrastructure architecture for the EHDS for secondary uses of health data (Policy
                                                   Option 2).




        Figure 8. Centralised infrastructure architecture for the EHDS for secondary uses of health data
                                                (Policy Option 3).


34
     ANNEX 5: METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH

     This section presents the methodological approach used in this impact assessment,
     including the general approach used in the study supporting this impact assessment. The
     body of the text of this impact assessment provides complementary information, where
     necessary, particularly in the footnotes.

     7   1.                  SOURCES

     The assessment of the costs was carried out using multiple sources and triangulating data
     when possible. The main sources used have been:
               desk research;
               interviews with stakeholders from national authorities in four Member States
                (Belgium, France, Germany, Slovakia);
               information from stakeholders’ workshops organised as part of related
                European Commission activities and initiatives;
               data from other relevant and still ongoing studies commissioned by DG
                SANTE; and
               results of the Public Consultation as relevant.

     8   2.                  DISCOUNT RATE

     A 3% social discount rate was applied. Monetary results are expressed in current prices.

     9   3.                  TIMELINE

     All figures are provided over 10 years from entry into force, as net present value, unless
     specified otherwise.

     10 4.                   BASELINE SCENARIO

     The baseline scenario defines the expected evolution of the primary and secondary uses of
     health data in the EU (and the problems of concern within it) in the absence of additional
     EU intervention.
     For both primary and secondary data, a baseline scenario was established to understand
     which Member States already implement measures in line with what is proposed under
     each measure for primary and secondary data. This analysis allows for the identification of
     those countries for which the EU proposals will require larger adjustments (e.g. creating
     structures and policies ex-novo), and of those countries for which the EU proposals will
     require adjustments of measures already in place.
     The following information was mapped for all Member States, as these are considered
     relevant predictors of the preparedness of Member States to implement the EU proposals:
               participation in the eHDSI by 2025;
               deployment of EHRs and data personal spaces;
               existence of labelling/certification mechanisms for digital healthcare services
                and products and the costs for this; and
               existence of governance and digital infrastructure for regulating secondary
                access to health data.


35
     This mapping exercise was also used to collect available data on the costs of such national
     measures, to be used in the estimation of the likely costs of the measures proposed for the
     different categories of stakeholders concerned.
     The baseline scenario also considers that the estimated governance framework, including
     potentially two joint actions, would cover for the staff costs (for Member States and the
     Commission) of twice-a-year 1-day general meetings and operational meetings of 1.5
     hours, on top of the joint actions. This estimate for the governance framework in the
     baseline relies on the experience of the eHealth Network. Normally, two physical meetings
     of the eHealth Network and semantic and technical subgroups would be organised yearly.
     These are complemented with online meetings (which reached 300 meetings during March
     2020 and September 2021, to deal with COVID-19, although the normal activity is
     expected to be less intensive). Here, the participation was counted involving 30 Member
     States and online meetings of 1-1.5 hours. The work of the eHealth Network is
     complemented with joint actions to support specific cooperation activities, and this would
     be expected to continue in the future.
     Based on the information provided by Member States (e.g. regarding their deployment
     roadmap for cross-border services), the expectation is that, within baseline, by the end of
     10 years period, all Member States will have a National Contact Point for eHealth and
     digital services for the exchange of patient summaries and ePrescriptions. However, based
     on the same information, the expectation is that only around 20 Member States would
     allow their patients and healthcare professionals to share or have access to laboratory
     results, images and image reports, discharge reports within the same 10 year period.
     The benefits originating from cross-border ePrescriptions are calculated on the basis of the
     methodology used for the 2012 impact assessment for the Commission Implementing
     Directive on the recognition of medical prescriptions issued in another Member State14.
     This methodology allows for capturing the cost of non-dispensation of a cross-border
     prescription (in the form of a visit to a local General Practitioner), as well as to identify the
     potential benefit of rolling out cross-border digital health services.
     Results from the study supporting the evaluation of the CBHC Directive, which includes a
     repeat study of the cross-border prescriptions use case, suggest that 7.8 million cross-
     border prescriptions are presented for dispensation per year in EU, with a non-dispensation
     rate of 46%, which is down from the estimated 55% non-dispensation rate in 2012. The
     key problem drivers for non-dispensation include veryfying prescription, veryfying
     prescribing doctor, language, insufficient information, correct drug/device and alternative
     drug/device. One important limitation of the calculation of the non-dispensation rate in
     2021 (46%) and the reasons for non-prescription is that it originates from a survey with a
     low response rate of 158 pharmacists across 5 countries, which was extrapolated to the
     whole of the EU.
     The cross-border exchange service of ePrescriptions through MyHealth@EU would solve
     authentication and language barrier issues. To calculate the cost of non-dispensation, it is
     assumed that an individual would need to visit a local GP to obtain a local prescription.
     The cost for visiting a local GP is estimated at EUR 65.77, based on a population-weighted
     extrapolation of the outpatient/ambulatory activity (2.6 billion consultations per year) and


     14

          https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/default/files/cross_border_care/docs/impl_directive_presciptions_2012
          _ia_en.pdf




36
     the total general outpatient curative and specialised outpatient curative care cost (EUR
     132.5 billion, from Eurostat). The adoption timeline is based on input collected from
     Member States.
     The benefits originating from cross-border interoperability of medical images are
     calculated as potential savings in the use of medical imaging machinery (Computed
     Tomography Scanners, Magnetic Resonance Imaging Units, PET scanners). For that
     purpose, the number of examinations using medical imaging techniques in the EU (97.7
     million examinations, based on a population-weighted extrapolation from the total
     reported in Eurostat) was multiplied by the estimated cost for the UK (GBP 94, GBP 173
     and GBP 270, respectively15), and corrected for the proportion of examinations of non-
     residents across the EU using the proportion of non-residents among all hospital
     discharges as a proxy (population-weighted average: 0.63%; based on Eurostat data).
     There is very limited data available on the estimated costs of examinations involving
     imaging technology in the EU. While the UK is no longer an EU member, the costs
     available for the UK are considered a useful proxy for the EU.
     The amount of duplications/waste is considered between 4% and 16% based on data
     reported for The Netherlands and Germany, respectively16, which was used to calculate the
     lower and upper bounds. The absence of precise and up-to-date data on waste in health and
     the potential contribution of interoperability to solving this problem is a source of
     uncertainty. However, the duplication/waste rates (4% and 16%), although estimated
     originally in 2007, are thought to be conservative given that several studies published in
     the last 5 years have estimated overall wasteful spending as 20% of total spending17.
     Moreover, OECD estimates that around a fifth of health care expenditure across the OECD
     countries (around USD 1.3 trillion annually) is wasteful (such as the unnecessary
     duplication of diagnostic tests or services, avoidable hospitalisations, inappropriate care,
     and other inefficiencies within clinical, operational, and administrative activities), i.e. it is
     not used to generate better health, and sometimes even harms health18.
     For estimating the investments needed at national level for interoperability of the data
     domains included in the European Electronic Health Record exchange format
     (ePrescriptions, patient summaries, medical images, laboratory results and discharge
     letters), of original clinical documents and for the access of patients to their health data,
     the digital health service availability at national level was used as gathered by Thiel et al.
     The estimated average cost to introduce nationally a digital health service for a data
     domain that is in scope of MyHealth@EU is between EUR 50 and 150 million. This is
     based on estimates reported by Member States (e.g. a large-sized Member State reported
     the need for EUR 100-200 million for national deployment of digital health services in the
     scope of MyHealth@EU), and a mapping of the deployment roadmap by Member States
     of the MyHealth@EU services. There is little visibility currently of the national investment
     requirements for the deployment of MyHealth@EU services nationally, and this
     uncertainty is reflected in the wide range between the estimated lower (EUR 3 billion) and
     upper bounds (EUR 9 billion).


     15
               https://digital.nhs.uk/services/national-casemix-office/downloads-groupers-and-tools/local-payment-
           grouper-2019-20
     16
        Addressing Overutilization in Medical Imaging | Radiology (rsna.org)
     17
        OECD/EU (2018), Health at a Glance: Europe 2018: State of Health in the EU Cycle, OECD Publishing,
           Paris. https://doi.org/10.1787/health_glance_eur-2018-en
     18
        https://www.oecd.org/health/health-systems/Empowering-Health-Workforce-Digital-Revolution.pdf




37
     11 5.                        ESTIMATION OF COSTS OF MEASURES PROPOSED

     The mapping exercise of Member State preparedness revealed a low availability of
     detailed information to be used for the estimation of the costs of the measures considered
     in this impact assessment. Specifics on costs and structures applicable to the estimation
     exercise were available only for a very limited number of Member States (the most
     advanced ones).
     It was thus decided to use the mapping exercise to build clusters of countries which had
     similar developments in digital healthcare which could then be used to estimate the likely
     extent of the costs associated with implementing the different measures proposed. In
     detail, the following dimensions were used to define the clusters:
           Health expenditure as a share of GDP (dataset from Eurostat19), as a proxy for the
            size of the heath sector in the country and the existing development of digital health
            products and services (as it is considered that part of the health expenditure would
            be for the EHRs, telehealth and m-health).
           Index of development of cross-border public services (from the annual
            eGovernment benchmark20), as a proxy of the development of the digital
            infrastructure necessary to implement the measures considered by the impact
            assessment. It was not possible to use more specific indices, as those measuring the
            IT infrastructure are not up-to-date (e.g. the ITU index has been under revision
            since 201821), and the Digital Health Index recently created by the WHO 22 only
            covers 22 countries (only one in the EU).
           Existence (already operational or under development) of a Health Data Access
            Body23, as a proxy for how advanced countries are in relation to the secondary use
            of data.
     The combination of these indicators allowed for the identification of three clusters. The
     first cluster (Cluster A) includes countries above the EU average in both indices, and with
     an existing or soon-to-be created Health Data Access Body. The second cluster (Cluster B)
     includes countries above the EU average in only one of the indices, and with no (or a soon-
     to-be created) Health Data Access Body. Finally, the third cluster (Cluster C) includes
     countries below the EU average in both indices, and with no Health Data Access Body.
     The clusters were thus used to provide some granularity to the estimation of costs for
     national authorities, manufacturers, dataset owners and researchers in the Member States.
     The clusters were considered to be predictors of the effort and costs necessary for Member
     States to implement the measures considered by the impact assessment. Countries in
     Cluster A are more advanced and likely to require less effort, while countries in Cluster B



     19
        See: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/products-eurostat-news/-/ddn-20201202-1
     20
         See: https://www.capgemini.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/eGovernment-Benchmark-2020-Insight-
           Report.pdf
     21
                                               See:                                        https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-
           D/Statistics/Documents/events/egti2020/IDI2020_BackgroundDocument_20200903.pdf
     22
        See: https://www.who.int/health-topics/digital-health#tab=tab_1
     23
        European Commission (2020). Assessment of the EU Member States rules on health data in the light of
           GDPR.              https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/health/files/ehealth/docs/ms_rules_health-data_en.pdf
           (Annexes available at: https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/default/files/ehealth/docs/ms_rules_health-
           data_annex_en.pdf).




38
     are likely to require more effort (and incur higher costs), and countries in Cluster C even
     higher effort and costs.
     Available information on costs concerned Member States in Cluster A. Such data was then
     use as a proxy for the basic estimation, to be adjusted for each cluster to account for the
     level of effort required.
     The table below provides an overview of the composition of the clusters and the basis
     assumptions used to estimate the efforts and costs.
     Table 5. Clusters of Member States used for cost estimation

     Cluster       Cluster A                   Cluster B                        Cluster C
     Number        8                           10                               9
     of MSs
     MSs           AT, BE, DK, FI, FR, DE,     CY, EE, IE, IT, LV, LU, MT,      BG, HR, CZ, GR, HU, LT, PL,
                   NL, SW                      PT, SL, ES                       RO, SK
     Assumpt       80%-90%     of     basic    110%-120% of basic estimation    130%-150%       of    basic
     ion   of      estimation                                                   estimation
     costs

     12 6.                        GENERAL TAKE-UP/PARTICIPATION SCENARIOS

     It was also considered that the implementation of the measures analysed in this impact
     assessment would follow different ‘paths’, depending on their nature (i.e. voluntary vs.
     mandatory), the interest towards the domain (especially in the case of voluntary measures),
     the level of investment and time needed to be ready for implementation (the
     implementation of eHDSI, with the progressive participation of Member States over time,
     provided an example), the existing level of governance and infrastructure necessary to
     support the implementation.
     Where insufficient information exists for the estimation of adoption and participation,
     Member States were clustered into 3 groups (Clusters A, B, and C) 24. While Member
     States in Cluster A and, to a lesser extent, Cluster B were considered likely to participate
     in voluntary measures from the beginning or early-on following their introduction, this
     was considered more difficult for countries in Cluster C.
     As a result, the study generated take-up/participation scenarios to account for the number
     of Member States likely to implement voluntary measures, and the rate at which Member
     States from different clusters are likely to be ready to deploy the measures (either
     voluntary or mandatory).
     The first scenario (low participation) considers that only up to 20 Member States are likely
     to implement some voluntary measures proposed over the 10-year period considered,
     either because the investments necessary are deemed too expensive in relation to the likely
     benefits, and/or because the measures are considered to interfere with national
     prerogatives.




     24
          For example, for the adoption of MyHealth@EU over time more detailed information was collected by
            DG SANTE and other supporting studies, which was used to model specific adoption timelines for the
            baseline and each policy option.




39
     The second scenario (medium participation) considers that up to 25 Member States are
     likely to implement some voluntary measures proposed over the 10-year period
     considered.
     Finally, the third scenario (high participation) considers that all 27 Member States are
     likely to implement some voluntary measures proposed over the 10-year period
     considered.
     The table below provides an overview of the estimated take-up/participation rate over the
     10-year period considered under the three scenarios.
     Table 6 – Take-up/participation scenarios used for cost estimation

     N. MSs     Year 1   Year 2       Year 3   Year 4   Year 5   Year 6   Year 7   Year 8   Year 9   Year 10
     Scenario 1 – low participation
     Cluster    8        8            8        8        8        8        8        8        8        8
     A
     Cluster    2        3            4        5        7        8        9        10       10       10
     B
     Custer C                                                                               1        2
     Scenario 2 – medium participation
     Cluster    8       8        8             8        8        8        8        8        8        8
     A
     Cluster    4       6        7             8        9        10       10       10       10       10
     B
     Custer C                                                    1        2        3        5        7
     Scenario 3 – high participation
     Cluster    8        8         8           8        8        8        8        8        8        8
     A
     Cluster    4        6         7           8        9        10       10       10       10       10
     B
     Cluster                                            1        2        4        6        8        9
     C

     13 7.                      SPECIFIC ASSUMPTIONS USED FOR MEASURES ON PRIMARY USE
          OF HEALTH DATA

     14 7.1.                    GOVERNANCE

     Governance costs are to be incurred by the Commission and Member States.
     Costs for the Commission are estimated using the available information on existing related
     to similar initiatives as a proxy. In more details:
        In the case of measure Policy Option 1 (strengthened eHealth Network), cost
         estimations are based on the current EU funding of the eHealth Network, increased to
         reflect the mandatory participation of all Member States and the broadened scope of
         their work.
        In case of measure Policy Option 2 (Expert Group on Digital Health), costs estimations
         are based on costs information available on other expert groups organised and
         coordinated by DG SANTE, and used by ICF in other recent impact assessments for
         DG SANTE. On this basis, up to 4 FTE were considered to be needed for the
         participation in the Expert Group on Digital Health.
        In case of measure Policy Option 3 (new task given to an existing EU Body), costs
         estimations are based on the size of the team working on digital health at DG SANTE
         (10-12 FTE). On this basis, the costs are assumed to be equal to 12 FTE over 10 years.


40
           In case of measure Policy Option 3+ (new EU Body), cost estimations are based on
            information available on the budget for European Labour Authority, a recently created
            agency assisting national authorities to help ensure that EU rules on labour mobility
            and social security coordination are enforced consistently, which is used as a proxy25.
     Costs for Member States are estimated using the same approach, i.e. using available
     information on the governance costs for similar initiatives as a proxy. In more details:
           In the case of measure Policy Option 1 (strengthened eHealth Network), cost
            estimations are based on the current EU funding of the eHealth network, increased to
            reflect the mandatory participation of all Member States and the broadened scope of
            their work.
           In case of measure Policy Option 2 (Expert Group on Digital Health) and Policy
            Option 3 (new task given to an existing EU Body), costs estimations are based on costs
            information available on other expert groups organised and coordinated by DG
            SANTE, and the related activities and costs of participating Member States (e.g.
            preparatory work for meetings, participation to technical groups, etc.);
           In case of measure Policy Option 3+ (new EU Body), costs estimations are based on
            information available on the costs for Member States in the case of supporting the
            work of an EU body such as the EDPB, used as a proxy.

     15 7.2.                       DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE

     The costs for MyHealth@EU are estimated taking in consideration the experience of the
     deployment of National Contact Points for eHealth (NCPeH) and additional cross-border
     digital health services (for patient summaries and ePrescriptions) for the first 6 years
     (2016-2021) of deployment and operation of this infrastructure. The services portfolio for
     MyHealth@EU includes the exchange of patient summaries ajd ePrescriptions currently
     and, in the future, medical images, discharge letters and reports and laboratory results, and
     original clinical documents (plus patients’ access to health data in Policy Options 1, 2 and
     3).
     The total costs include the initial investment phase (set-up) and maintenance phase
     (operation). These estimates are based on expected timelines for the deployment of new
     NCPeHs in Member States, as reported by the relevant experts, and new digital health
     services in MyHealth@EU, according to each policy option, e.g. while in Policy Option 1
     the assumptions is that all Member States would have a NCPeH established but not all
     services deployed within 10 years, Policy Option 3 imposes a requirement for all Member
     States to have all MyHealth@EU services in operation by Year 3. Policy Option 2 sets out
     a faster adoption scenario than in Policy Option 1, with patient summaries and
     ePrescriptions becoming mandatory in Year 3, and the rest of data domains by Year 6.
     While these adoption scenarios are based on the best available information, one key
     limitation is that these adoption scenarios are dependent on future political decisions and,
     therefore, there is limited certainty.
     The cost estimation per service is an extrapolation of costs incurred by Member States in
     the deployment and maintenance of existing services gathered through a survey with
     Member State experts and validated internally. These costs entail: the expenditure for


     25
          See: https://www.ela.europa.eu/sites/default/files/2021-01/Draft-SPD-2022-2024_0.pdf




41
     central services, calculated based on the incurred costs by the Commission (between EUR
     4-7 million/year); costs for Member States, based on previous financing from Connecting
     Europe Facility (CEF) and inputs of Member States. On average, the costs are: EUR 1
     million for the implementation of each service (Patient Summary, ePrescription, images,
     laboratory results, discharge reports and access of patients to their health data in a foreign
     language) and between EUR 0.3-1 million/NCPeH/year for maintaining the services and to
     upgrade the existing services to the new requirements. In absence of detailed information
     on associated costs, costs related to audits of new NCPeHs, project management, etc. are
     added as 10% of maintenance and implementation costs.
     The detailed implementation costs for each service are estimated as follows:
            -   Implementation of initial services (including the deployment of the NCPeH and
                Patient Summaries and ePrescriptions): EUR 0.8 million to EUR 2.5 million;
            -   Implementation of Original Clinical Documents: EUR 0.8 million to EUR 2.5
                million;
            -   Implementation of Structured Laboratory reports: EUR 0.3 million to EUR 1.0
                million;
            -   Implementation of the Structured Hospital Discharge Letters: EUR 0.5 million
                to EUR 1.5 million;
            -   Implementation of the Structured Medical Images and Reports: EUR 0.3 million
                to EUR 1.0 million;
     The above described reference values were used as assumptions to estimate the necessary
     investment in digital infrastructures and adjusted according to the intensity of the different
     policy options.
     The total cost over 10 years for MyHealth@EU varies according to the intensity of the
     policy options. For Option 1, costs are distributed along the 10 year period, with Member
     States gradually adopting more services. For Options 2 and 3, due to the mandatory nature
     of the interventions, costs tend to accumulate in the first 5 years of these intervention. In
     particular in Option 3 where all the services become available in all countries by the Year
     3. Hence, the costs peak in the first years of the initiative while the remaining years are
     dedicated to maintenance.
     For estimating the total cost of rolling out the necessary digital infrastructure, the digital
     health service availability nationally gathered by Thiel et al. (2021) was used as a
     reference.

     16 7.3.                 DATA INTEROPERABILITY

     Measures for data interoperability in the case of primary use of health data include
     provisions on cross-border exchanges falling within EEHRxF, quality labels for digital
     health products and services and framework for assessment of wellness mobile
     applications.
     The costs for the Commission and Member States are estimated to account for their role in
     the design and definition of implementation of policies and implementing measures for the
     provisions listed above. Measures for data interoperability are expected to generate costs
     for manufacturers of digital health products and services. Some key assumptions include:
            -   The estimated costs for self-declared labels for EHR sytems, digital health
                products (Policy Option 1 and 2) are EUR 9,000-32,000 (EUR 1,500-3,000 for
                wellness applications). The overall amount is derived from the costs of the


42
                 German DiGA system. One important limitation is that these costs do not
                 include any cost of adaptation of the product to the requirements of the label,
                 but rather the preparatory work by the manufacturer for the self-declaration.
             -   The estimated costs for third-party certification for EHR sytems, digital health
                 products and wellness applications (Policy Option 3) are EUR 20,000-50,000.
                 Similarly, the same limitation applies: these costs do not include any cost of
                 adaptation of the product to the requirements of the certification.
     The table below shows the modelling assumptions for the calculation of costs for labelling
     and certification for each option. In the cases where labelling/certification is voluntary, a
     base year (Year 1) volume is estimated on the number of products labelled/certified within
     the French and German systems (DiGA). In the cases where labelling/certification is
     mandatory, a linear growth is assumed until full market coverage is reached in Year 5,
     which could mark the end of a possible transition period.

     Table 7. Modelling assumptions for the calculation of costs for labelling and certification for each
     option.

                                                                                           Option 3 (same for
                 Option 1                 Option 2               Option 2+                 Option 3+)
                 Voluntary self-          Mandatory self-        Mandatory third-          Mandatory third-party
                 declared label           declared label         party certification       certification
                 Base year 1: 8-12
                 products for Cluster 1
                 MSs, 5-9 for Cluster
                 2 MSs, 3-5 for
                 Cluster 3 MSs, i.e.      Estimated market       Estimated market
                 about 86 to 140 in       size: 4,000-5,000      size: 4,000-5,000         Estimated market size:
                 year 1                   products               products                  4,000-5,000 products
                 Gradual market
                 coverage with 10-
                 15% yearly market        Full market            Full market coverage      Full market coverage by
                 growth                   coverage by Year 5     by Year 5                 Year 5
      EHR        Cost per label: EUR      Cost per label: EUR    Cost per certification:   Cost per certification:
     systems     9,000-32,000             9,000-32,000           EUR 20,000- 50,000        EUR 20,000- 50,000
                 Voluntary self-          Mandatory self-        Mandatory third-          Mandatory third-party
                 declared label           declared label         party certification       certification
                 Base year 1: 8-12
                 products for Cluster 1
                 MSs, 5-9 for Cluster
                 2 MSs, 3-5 for
                 Cluster 3 MSs, i.e.      Estimated market       Estimated market
                 about 86 to 140 in       size: 5,000-20,000     size: 5,000-20,000        Estimated market size:
                 year 1                   products               products                  5,000-20,000 products
                 Gradual market
      Digital    coverage with 10-
      health     15% yearly coverage      Full market            Full market coverage      Full market coverage by
     products    growth                   coverage by Year 5     by Year 5                 Year 5
     (medical    Cost per label: EUR      Cost per label: EUR    Cost per certification:   Cost per certification:
     devices)    9,000-32,000             9,000-32,000           EUR 20,000- 50,000        EUR 20,000- 50,000
                 Voluntary self-          Voluntary self-        Voluntary self-           Mandatory third-party
                 declared label           declared label         declared label            certification
                                          Base year 1: 8-12      Base year 1: 8-12
     Wellness                             products for Cluster   products for Cluster 1
     applicati                            1 MSs, 5-9 for         MSs, 5-9 for Cluster
     ons (not    Base year 1: 60% of      Cluster 2 MSs, 3-5     2 MSs, 3-5 for
     medical     volume of digital        for Cluster 3 MSs,     Cluster 3 MSs, i.e.       Estimated market size:
     devices)    health products          i.e. about 86 to 140   about 86 to 140 in        20,000 products


43
                                         in year 1               year 1
                                         Gradual market
                 Gradual market          coverage with 5-        Gradual market
                 coverage with 5-10%     10% yearly market       coverage with 5-10%      Full market coverage by
                 yearly market growth    growth                  yearly market growth     Year 5
                 Cost per label: EUR     Cost per label: EUR     Cost per label: EUR      Cost per certification:
                 9,000-32,000            9,000-32,000            9,000-32,000             EUR 20,000- 50,000
     The implementation costs for the label and assessment schemes are estimated using the
     information available on the fees charged by national authorities in the application of the
     DiGA system in Germany26. In particular, the fees charged by authorities are used as a
     proxy for the costs necessary for the labelling/certification body to process the
     documentation submitted. Manufacturers are estimated to incur into similar internal costs
     to prepare for the labelling/certification scheme, which is confirmed by the quantification
     of labelling/certification costs used recently in the Impact Assessment for the Digital
     Governance Act27.
     For estimating the cost of developing and maintaining a product database at EU level, the
     yearly costs of EUDAMED were taken as a reference, as it is a similar product database
     under the MDR. On this basis, the development costs where estimated at EUR 15-20
     million for development and EUR 2 million for maintenance when in regular operations.
     A key limitation of these calculations is the lack of reliable data on the market sizes and
     growth rates for different product categories. Therefore, proxies and ranges are used to
     overcome this uncertainty. Although the high uncertainty around the sizes of the targeted
     markets, the assumptions rely on the best available information, and are expected to
     capture the differences between mandatory and voluntary and self-declared and third-party
     schemes across the considered options.
     In the case of EHR systems, the volume of digital systems certified under the Finnish
     system was used as basis for extrapolation to the whole of the EU. Finland has enlisted
     around 400 electronic health record systems and other digital health products processing
     electronic health data in its current database of certifiable products. The system has been
     operated for more than 10 years. Out of these products, around 80 are connected to the
     national system (Kanta). By extrapolation, and considering that some of the products are
     either provided by manufacturers supplying several national markets concurrently, the
     estimate is that the market of EHR systems could have a size of 4,000-5,000 products
     within the scope of certification/labelling. Assuming that re-certification would be
     required every 5 years, the number of certifications during the period of 10 years could be
     estimated as 8,000-10,000.
     In the case of digital health products that are medical devices, the volume of software
     products on medical devices databases were used as a reference. The volume of products
     falling within the scope of certification/labelling was estimated to be 5,000-20,000.
     In the case of wellness applications, according to the IQVIA Institute, the volume of
     health-related mobile applications would have surpassed 350,000 globally in 202128.
     According to industry analysts, sales in health and fitness apps in Europe accounted for



     26
        See: https://www.bfarm.de/EN/Medical-devices/Tasks/Digital-Health-Applications/_node.html
     27
             See:      https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/impact-assessment-report-and-support-study-
           accompanying-proposal-regulation-data-governance
     28
        Digital Health Trends 2021 - IQVIA




44
     30% of global spending in the category, up from a 27% share in 2019. Therefore, the
     European market for wellness applications is estimated to comprise approximately
     100,000 products. It is uncertain how many of these wellness applications could eventually
     fall within the scope of mandatory third-party certification, and the eventual costs will vary
     dependent on this scope. However, for the purpose of the calculations, an assumption was
     made that 20% (20,000) could fall under the scope for certification. This volume is
     sufficiently large to illustrate the effect that mandatory third-party certification would have
     on market operators.

     17 7.4.                     ECONOMIC BENEFITS

     The estimation of the economic benefit for primary use of health data is based mostly on
     the potential saving for European citizens from access and use of telemedicine in place of
     traditional medicine services, as the former is cheaper.
     Telemedicine is not only less expensive to EU patients compared to traditional medicine,
     but it also requires less time taken for patients at health care. Both effects bring about
     potential savings in terms of the monetary cost of health care for patients and time taken
     which is monetised by taking the EU gross average salary as a measure of the value of
     time.
     Formulas applied:
             𝑃𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑠𝑎𝑣𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠 𝑎𝑡 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒
                          = [𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐸𝑈 𝑝𝑜𝑝𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛] ∗ [% 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑜𝑓 𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑑]
                          ∗ [% 𝑜𝑓 𝑑𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠] ∗ [% 𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑒 𝑢𝑝𝑡𝑎𝑘𝑒]
                          ∗ [𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑒 − 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑒]

     𝑃𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑠𝑎𝑣𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠 𝑎𝑡 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒
                  = [𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐸𝑈 𝑝𝑜𝑝𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛] ∗ [% 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑜𝑓 𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑑]
                  ∗ [% 𝑜𝑓 𝑑𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠] ∗ [% 𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑒 𝑢𝑝𝑡𝑎𝑘𝑒]
                  ∗ [𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒 𝑡𝑎𝑘𝑒𝑛 𝑖𝑛 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑒 − 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒 𝑡𝑎𝑘𝑒𝑛 𝑖𝑛 𝑡𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑒]
                  ∗ [𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝐸𝑢𝑟𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑛 𝑠𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑟𝑦]

     The estimation is based on the following evidence and assumptions:
                [Evidence] The annual cost of traditional medicine per EU citizen/patient is
                 EUR 68.9 compared to EUR 10 of telemedicine according to a market study
                 on telemedicine29.
                [Evidence] Traditional medicine demands more consultation time per year
                 (0.014 days) compared to telemedicine (0.03 days) according to the same
                 market study on telemedicine. This means more time taken for patients at their
                 health care centre.
                [Evidence] EU-27 population is assumed to grow at an 0.19% according to
                 Eurostat population projections (TPS00002).




     29
          European       Commission        (2018).      Market     study   on     telemedicine.  Available    at:
          https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/default/files/ehealth/docs/2018_provision_marketstudy_telemedicine_e
          n.pdf




45
                [Evidence-based assumption] The percentage of the population demanding
                 heavily health care is about 30% based on Eurostat self-perceived health
                 statistics (HS1 variable in the European Health interview survey) 30
                [Evidence-based assumption] The proportion of potential savings is adjusted
                 by a rate of digital readiness of users and is assumed at an average of 44%
                 based on Eurostat (eGovernment use)31.
                [Evidence-based assumption] The daily wage of EU-27 population on average
                 is EUR 172 based on Eurostat (LC_LCI_LEV32).
                A total demand for healthcare is assumed fixed and patients are able to
                 substitute traditional medicine by telemedicine which is cheaper for patients in
                 terms of monetary costs and time taken by the service.
                The total EU population demands healthcare according to their needs. Based
                 on EU survey on self-reported health, the coefficient adjusting the total
                 population is 35%.
     The uptake of telemedicine is given by the digital readiness of the EU population, hence,
     the effective demand for health is further adjusted by 44%, based on the index of digital
     readiness in Europe. The baseline uptake of telemedicine equals 5%, corresponding to the
     share telemedicine would substitute traditional medicine. The benefits by options are
     assumed as 6%, 20% and 20% for Policy Option 1, 2 and 3, respectively. This means 1%,
     15% and 15% above the baseline, respectively.
     One key limitation of this approach is the absence of a data-driven approach to attribute
     the potential for increasing efficiency (i.e. producing savings in the health sector) of each
     of the options. However, it is understood that voluntary measures are close to the baseline,
     and therefore their potential for producing benefits above the baseline is limited (hence,
     only a small improvement of 1% is attributed to Option 1), while options establishing
     obligations on manufacturers and Member States to ensure interoperability are expected to
     produce higher benefits (15% above the baseline).
     The benefits (explained above for baseline), stemming from the use of ePrescriptions and
     avoiding repeated costs, are maintained in subsequent policy options.

     18 8.                        SPECIFIC ASSUMPTIONS USED FOR MEASURES ON SECONDARY USE
          OF HEALTH DATA

     19 8.1.                      GOVERNANCE

     The assessment of the governance costs for secondary use of health data followed the same
     approach as for governance in the context of primary use of data. Measures in Policy
     Option 2 and 3 require Member States to designate a Health Data Access Body, which
     would require either the creation of such authority (if it does not exist already), or to assign
     such role to an existing national authority/body.




     30
                         See:                 https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=Self-
           perceived_health_statistics&oldid=509628
     31
        See: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/products-eurostat-news/-/EDN-20200307-1
     32
        Eurostat - Data Explorer (europa.eu)




46
     Based on the available information on the annual costs of existing national Health Data
     Access Bodies (e.g. in France and Finland), it is estimated that their staff includes at least
     10 FTEs, and their costs varies between EUR 2 million and EUR 5 million per year.
     Under both measures, it is assumed that only a very limited number of Member States will
     create such authorities (larger Member States, from Cluster B – two in Policy Option 2 and
     four in Policy Option 3), while all the remaining ones will attribute this role to existing
     bodies. The new role will require an extra budget and staff for those national authorities,
     which is estimated in 3 to 5 FTEs (as most of the remaining Member States are smaller
     ones and/or from Cluster C), with annual running costs of approximately EUR 200,000-
     250,000 per year.

     20 8.2.                     DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE

     Costs and revenues for the infrastructure for secondary use of health data are estimated
     taking as reference 2 of the existing Health Data Access Bodies (Findata and French
     Health Data Hub).
     The baseline considered the costs under Data Governance Act for setting up (EUR 10.6
     mil) and maintenance (EUR 0.6 mil/year) of the secure processing environments33.
     Costs are organised by initial investment phase (set-up) and maintenance phase
     (operation). While, in average a set-up phase from a Health Data Access Body can range
     from EUR 0.5 million to EUR 8.5 million (depending on the size and complexity of a
     Member State) the maintenance costs range from EUR 0.2 million to EUR 4.0 million per
     year, per country.
     To connect the National Health Data Access Body to the EU-wide infrastructures, the
     initial investment costs vary between EUR 0.8 million to EUR 2.5 million per year, per
     country, while maintenance costs of this connection are estimated to be between EUR 0.2
     million to EUR 0.8 million. The cost for central services is estimated EUR 7 million
     yearly.
     Besides the digital infrastructure deployed in the Member States, it is also important to
     consider the costs associated with supporting services (also known as central or core
     services) provided by the Commission. These central services would require an initial
     overall investment of EUR 25 million across a period of 4 years and yearly maintenance
     costs of around EUR 4-7 million.
     For the calculation of costs of national health data access bodies, EUR 75,000 is used as a
     reference for each FTE, for comparability, as this is used as a reference in the impact
     assessment for the DGA. The average overall costs over 10 years for individual Health
     Data Access Bodies (HDABs) are expected to range between EUR 3.3 million (4 FTE)
     and 41.3 million (50 FTE), depending on the size of the organisational arrangement. The
     lower bound (4 FTE) is meant to reflect the choice of a Member State to establish the
     HDAB within an existing body, while the upper bound (50 FTE) is meant to reflect the
     choice of a Member State to establish a separate independent body for the HDAB (as done
     in France with the French Health Data Hub).
     The upper bound is calculated on the basis of a balanced mix of sizes: 11 4-FTE HDABs;
     10 15-FTE HDABs; 6 25-FTE HDABs; and 1 50-FTE HDAB. Given that many countries


     33
          https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/dae/document.cfm?doc_id=71225




47
     have not adopted yet HDABs, it should be noted that the calculation of the upper bound is
     highly uncertain, but it is aligned with the various approach taken so far by Member
     States.
     Total costs vary according to the intensity of the policy options. For Policy Option 1, costs
     are distributed along the 10-year period and the costs related with EU connection are
     calculated as an additional cost in the infrastructure for primary use of health data
     (MyHealth@EU). For Options 2 and 3, costs increase in particular in the first 5 years of
     the intervention, as this is the period when Member States would most likely make
     investments to meet their obligaions. Regarding Option 3, costs increase for the central
     services due to the centralised architecture that requires that a bigger number of digital
     services by the central entity, namely to EUR 32 million across a period of 3 years and
     yearly maintenance costs of around EUR 4 million. It should be noted thath the estimated
     costs for the central infrastructure are highly uncertain, as the actual system requirements
     will not be defined until the implementation phase begins, but they build upon the
     information that is currently available from similar initiatives (e.g. EU DARWIN).
     The above-described reference values were used as assumptions to estimate the necessary
     investment in digital infrastructures and adjusted according to the intensity of the different
     policy options.

     21 8.3.                 DATA INTEROPERABILITY AND DATA QUALITY

     Measures for data interoperability for secondary use of health data include requirements
     for Member States to ensure secure, reliable and interoperable discovery, access, sharing
     and processing of health data (up to certification in Policy Option 3) and procedures for
     handling multi-country data requests.
     Measures for data quality include quality labels (and certification in measure Policy
     Option 3) datasets to evaluate, according to a common assessment scheme, their quality.
     The cost of label/certification for data quality (carried out by public authorities) was
     estimated using the same costs calculated by the Impact Assessment for the Data
     Governance Act (EUR 20,000-50,000, of which half represent internal costs for
     manufacturers and half certification fees, which are considered as a proxy of the costs for
     authority to process the application) as a basis. The following additional assumptions were
     used:
        Policy Option 1: costs for self-assessment estimated to represent about half of the
         certification costs, to be borne by datasets owners only;
        Policy Option 2: costs for self-assessed label estimated to represent about 70% of the
         certification costs, to be borne by datasets owners only;
        Policy Option 3: costs for public certification scheme estimated in line with the IA for
         the Data Governance Act, to be borne by public authorities managing the certification
         process and by datasets owners (in equals share);
        Number of datasets likely to be labelled/certified: extrapolated from the number of
         datasets currently available in national systems (15, of average), and used as a proxy
         for Cluster A countries. Member States in Clusters B and C are estimated to have
         fewer datasets (8 and 6 respectively). Availability of datasets is expected to grow
         between 5% and 10% per year over the 10-year period considered.




48
     22 8.4.                     ECONOMIC BENEFITS

     The total benefit of secondary use of health data is the sum of the economic value of health
     data, the savings of more efficient access to data and cost savings thanks to information
     transparency.
     The economic value of health data is measured using the economic value of data in general
     estimated by the IDC study and used by the study supporting the Data Governance Act IA.
     Then, the value of data sharing is adjusted by the R&D expenditure in health as proportion
     of GDP in Europe. This adjustment allows to obtain an approximate magnitude of the
     corresponding value attributable to health. The estimation is based on the following
     evidence and key assumptions:
                [Evidence] According to the WHO, Europe allocates about 0.03% to R&D in
                 health as proportion of the EU GDP34.
                To measure how much of the overall value corresponds to health, it was used
                 the 8.3% as adjusting factor, which is the average expenditure on health across
                 EU-27 countries.
     [Evidence] The value of data sharing is obtained from the IDC market study on data
     economy that was used in the study to support the Data Governance Act 35. A conservative
     estimate increase of 0.5%, 1.0% and 1.2%, respectively for each policy option, is applied
     to the economic value of health data based on the econometric analysis performed as part
     of the impact assessment of the Data Governance Act.

     For the benefits from information transparency for policy-makers and regulators thanks
     to direct access to health data through EHDS infrastructure, input gathered from experts in
     the pharmaceutical regulatory process was that if a 10% reduction in drug development
     cost of phase III trials can be delivered through use of real-world evidence (in situations
     where this is appropriate, e.g. repurposing medicines), it is estimated that, for 100
     medicines annually, this could produce a possible saving of EUR 184 million. The cost of
     a single phase I clinical trial was estimated as 2.9 million EUR, 7.4 million EUR for phase
     II and 18.4 million EUR for a phase III trial36. Additionally, in a medium-sized EU
     country, a 5% saving in drug cost in oncology, diabetes, cardiovascular,
     respiratory/neurology thanks to information transparency regarding their effectiveness
     could result in an annual saving of EUR 50 million. With increasing prices of new
     medicines, this saving is expected to increase in the future. Over 10 years and
     extrapolating to the whole of the EU, these savings could yield a benefit of EUR 1.6
     billion. Given that existing initiatives will contribute to capturing this benefit, EUR 0.8
     billion (half) were attributed to the baseline, while other EUR 0.8 billion were attributed to
     Policy Options 2 and 3 for providing enhanced access to health data for policy-makers and
     regulators.




     34
                                       https://www.who.int/observatories/global-observatory-on-health-research-and-
           development/indicators/gross-domestic-r-d-expenditure-on-health-as-a-percent-of-gross-domestic-
           product
     35
        https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/impact-assessment-report-and-support-study-accompanying-
           proposal-regulation-data-governance
     36
        Martin L et al. How much do clinical trials cost? Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2017 Jun;16(6):381-382. doi:
           10.1038/nrd.2017.70. Epub 2017 May 19.




49
     There will also be saving stemming from efficiency gains (replacing the collection of
     consent by fees paid to data access bodies). The internal costs for national health data
     access bodies are estimated around EUR 2,100-2,600 per request. The costs for data
     owners are not possible to estimate, as this depends on standards established. The costs for
     data reusers include assembly of data requested and costs for obtaining individuals’
     consent in most Member States (used parameters: 100 requests per country, 30 min for
     obtaining each consent). However, the usual cohorts are much bigger (they can vary
     between 10 persons for rare disease to 500,000 data subjects for countries like Finland.
     There are also cases where the cohort could include the whole population of a country, in
     which case obtaining consent is very difficult and biased, as one cannot have random
     samples). The costs for the fees of data access bodies comprise for an average request
     including a EUR 1,000 data request, 115 EUR/data processing hour (an average of 10-20
     processing hours/request) and between 3 and 12 months of remote access. However, it
     should be noted that pricing models differ across existing health data access bodies and
     national policy choices. For example, the Danish body charges approximately EUR 300
     per data processing hour and estimates self-sustainability in the medium run, with the
     current evolution of the number of requests. French Data Hub does not charge the public
     sector and the overall fees may be lower. The average of requests per year took into
     account Finnish and Danish experience (400-500 requests per year), but French Data Hub
     recorded so far over 1600 projects, which indicates that the number also depends on the
     size of the country.

     The provisions for handling multi-country data requests were estimated using the
     following key data points:
          Number of requests: extrapolated from the (expected) number of requests (600) from
           the Finnish system for secondary use of health data (Findata), using the R&D
           expenditure of EU Member States from Eurostat37 as an indicator for the volume of
           request. This value was used as proxy for Cluster A countries. Member States in
           Clusters B and C are estimated to have fewer requests per year (245 and 241
           respectively). The number of requests is expected to grow between 5% and 10% per
           year over the 10-year period considered, as an effect of increased availability of
           datasets and of increasing interest in health-related fields of research.
          Costs for authorities to process the requests: estimated using the information on the
           data request fee in the Finnish case as a proxy (corresponding to about 3 person-days),
           and considered to decrease as an effect of the coordination mechanisms implemented
           (to 2.5 person-days under measure Policy Option 2 and to 2 person-days under
           measure Policy Option 3). Variable costs for the extraction and treatment of data
           requested were not included, as there was not sufficient information to build a robust
           example. Costs for the EC to process the request were estimated for measure Policy
           Option 3, and assessed at 0.5 person-days per request.
          Costs for data users (researchers) to prepare the data request: assumed to be of
           approximately 15 person-days (not including waiting times in between steps of the
           process) for multi-country requests to be filed separately to each national data access
           body, up to 20 days.



     37
          See: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-
             explained/index.php?title=R_%26_D_expenditure&oldid=503835




50
     An illustrative example was elaborated to describe the procedures and costs under the
     different measures, considering a 3-country data request.

     23 9.                METHODOLOGY AND ASSUMPTIONS USED FOR THE EVALUATION
          OF THE ARTICLE 14 OF THE CBHC DIRECTIVE (ANNEX 12)

     A consortium led Open Evidence carried out a specific study for the Commission to
     inform and support the evaluation of Article 14 of Directive 2011/24/EU. Lot 4 of that
     study examines the effectiveness, efficiency, coherence, relevance, and EU added value of
     Article 14 of the Directive 2011/24/EU and other related articles. The study was launched
     in September 2020 and the final report was provided in August 202138.

     An extensive desk review was conducted between September and October 2020 to get the
     most updated and comprehensive literature and policy documents to answer the research
     questions guiding this study. This was complemented by targeted consultations activities
     (eHealth Network members and coordinators of Joint Actions; national bodies (Ministries
     of Health, eHealth agencies, National Medicines Agencies); EU institutions (European
     Commission, European Medicines Agency, ECDC); patients organisations; healthcare
     Professionals organisations; organisations representing the industry (medical devices
     industry); individual companies (digital industry, pharmaceutical industry, medical devices
     industry). Stakeholders were consulted via in-depth interviews39, focus groups40 and online
     surveys41.

     The study supporting the evaluation is based on the available evidence drawn from the
     triangulation of a diverse and appropriate range of methods and sources. Where secondary
     sources were not available to answer the research questions guiding this study, primary
     data and evidence was collected. A complementary desk research exercise was conducted
     to ensure the completeness and validity of the results obtained.

     The principal limitation that this type of methodology is an intrinsic limitation coming
     from literature that may not cover all the information available. Another limitation was
     accurately quantifying costs and benefits of the access and exchange of health data by
     stakeholders. The nature of quantifying this process is complex due to the uniqueness per
     case and hard-to-measure realisation of outputs. For instance, in the case of
     MyHealth@EU, since the exchanges on the platform for the early adopters only started in


     38
        Lupiáñez-Villanueva, F., Gunderson, L., Vitiello, S., Febrer, N., Folkvord, F., Chabanier, L., Filali, N.,
           Hamonic, R., Achard, E., Couret, H., Arredondo, M. T., Cabrera, M. F., García, R., López, L., Merino,
           B., Fico, G. (2022). Study on Health Data, Digital Health and Artificial Intelligence in Healthcare,
           Publications Office of the European Union. https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-
           /publication/179e7382-b564-11ec-b6f4-01aa75ed71a1/language-en
     39
        Interviews with targeted representatives of the industry and of patients, as well as co-coordinators of
           current and past Joint Actions supporting the eHealth Network and the European Health Data Space
           (TEHDaS).
     40
        Three focus groups/workshops were carried out in. The first workshop was organised with the eHealth
     Network and focused on the evaluation of the activities carried out. The second workshop was organised
     with a broad range of experts and focused on future needs. A third workshop was carried out on the
     secondary use of health data with the participation of members of the Joint Action TEHDaS.
     41
        A survey was sent out to all eHealth Network members to gather information on the evaluation of the
           activities carried out by the eHealth Network covering both the cross-border provision of digital
           healthcare across the EU and access to health data for secondary use. A total of 19 Member States and
           Norway responded to this survey.




51
     2019 (and 7 Member States were live at the end of 2020 and 9 mid-2021), the full potential
     of the platform has not been observed yet. Furthermore, the results suggest that most
     exchanges happen across neighbouring countries. Of the early adopters, only Finland and
     Estonia are neighbouring countries, limiting even more the exchanges on the platform. As
     more Member States and more neighbours will join the platform, one can expect that over
     time there will be more information to assess the results and impacts in this area.

     Furthermore, quantitative data on the costs of implementing the infrastructure were limited
     as the Member States that did implement the infrastructure were not able to quantify the
     costs in terms of man-days and budget allocated to it. Often, eHealth Network members
     did not keep appropriate accounting of the effort invested in carrying out eHealth Network
     activities and did not split this work from the one conducted for their national institutions.
     As a result, in the area of efficiency, the information is mostly qualitative and resulting
     from expert’s opinions.




52
ANNEX 6: COHERENCE WITH OTHER LEGISLATIVE INSTRUMENTS




     Figure 9. Interplay of the proposal for a regulation on the EHDS with other horizontal and health-specific
                                                legislative frameworks.

     1. Relevant fundamental rights legislation

The Union is founded on the values of human dignity and respect of human rights that are further
specified in the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights (the Charter). Articles 7 and 8 of the Charter
guarantee the fundamental rights of individuals to privacy and to data protection, while Article 35
ensures that a high level of human health protection shall be integrated in the definition and
implementation of all the Union's policies and activities. Some fundamental rights obligations are
further provided for in EU secondary legislation, in particular in the field of data protection.

In particular, the General Data Protection Regulation42 and the EU Data Protection
Regulation43 aim to protect the fundamental rights and freedoms of natural persons, and in
particular their right to the protection of personal data including personal health data, whenever
their personal data are processed. The sharing by data controllers of personal data with third parties
and their further processing are subject to a number of data processing principles such as
lawfulness, transparency, fairness, accuracy, data minimisation, purpose and storage limitation,
confidentiality and accountability. Additionally, natural persons, whose personal data are processed,
have a number of rights, for instance, the right to access, correct, or port their personal data under
certain conditions. Stricter conditions also apply for the processing of sensitive data, including
health data, genetic data and biometric data used for identification purposes, while processing that
poses high risk to natural persons’ rights and freedoms requires a data protection impact
assessment. The legislative framework for the EHDS would ensure compliance with the rules of the


42
   Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of
natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing
Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation).
43
     Regulation (EU) 2018/1725
existing legislation on the protection of personal data and would provide further harmonised
specifications on the processing of health data in line with Articles 6(1)(3) and 9(2)(h), (i) and (j) of
the GDPR. The legislative initiative also aims at strengthening the application of individuals’ rights
granted under EU data protection legislation as regards the processing of their health data and
provides more control over their access and use. It would also provide the EU legal basis for the re-
use of health data, based on public interest, scientific, historical research and statistical purposes (as
per Article 9(2), (i) and (j)).


     2. Directive 2011/24/EU on the application of patients’ rights in cross-border healthcare
        and other legislation relevant for digital health services and products

The current relevant applicable EU legal framework for the cross-border exchange of health data is
laid down in Directive 2011/24/EU on the application of patients’ rights in cross-border
healthcare44. The Directive provides rules for facilitating the access to safe and high-quality cross-
border healthcare, ensures patient mobility in accordance with the principles established by the
Court of Justice, and promotes cooperation on healthcare between Member States, in full respect of
national competencies in organising and delivering healthcare. The Directive applies to individual
patients who decide to seek healthcare in a Member State other than the Member State of affiliation.

However that legislation does not address access to health data for reuse. Furthermore, the proposal
for a Data Governance Act, currently being examined by the co-legislators, lays down a horizontal
framework across sectors with common governance mechanisms and rules to enhance access to
data for reuse, which will apply also in the health sector. The initiative aims at further
complementing these EU legislative frameworks with the necessary rules to further enhance health
data sharing and reuse in full respect of individuals’ fundamental rights.

In addition, the current legislative initiative would strengthen Article 14 of Directive 2011/24/EU
by facilitating a better uptake of digital health products and services for the provision of health care
(including telemedicine, telehealth, and mHealth) across the EU.

Article 14 of Directive 2011/24/EU requires the Union to support and facilitate cooperation and the
exchange of information among Member States working within a voluntary network connecting
national authorities responsible for eHealth in the Member States (the ‘eHealth Network’). The
objective of the eHealth Network is to “work towards delivering sustainable economic and social
benefits of European eHealth systems and services and interoperable applications, with a view to
achieving a high level of trust and security, enhancing continuity of care and ensuring access to safe
and high-quality healthcare.” (Art. 14(2)(a)). The eHealth Network – and the eHealth Digital
Service Infrastructure (eHDSI), later renamed “MyHealth@EU” – has improved the cross-border
exchange of health data for healthcare (primary use of data), such as patient summaries and e-
prescriptions. So far 7 Member States exchange health data via this infrastructure. The current
legislative initiative aims at expanding and strengthening the cross-border exchange of health data
to support continuity of care for citizens travelling within the EU, by amending relevant provisions
of Directive 2011/24/EU, in particular its Article 14.



44
     EUR-Lex - 32011L0024 - EN - EUR-Lex (europa.eu)
     3. Cybersecurity regulatory framework

The Directive on Security of Network and Information Systems ('NIS Directive' / 2016/1148/EU)
represents the first EU-wide rules on cybersecurity. The objective of the Directive is to achieve a
high common level of security of network and information systems within the EU and covers
operators working in the healthcare sector. The Cybersecurity regulatory framework also includes
the cybersecurity Regulation (2019/881/EU) and the Regulation on electronic identification and
trust services for electronic transactions in the internal market (eIDAS Regulation) which help
business, citizens and public authorities carry out secure and seamless electronic interactions using
electronic identification schemes (eIDs) to access public services available online in other EU
countries.

By promoting the use of compulsory common security standards and of the integration of electronic
identification (eID) for healthcare professionals and patients, the EHDS initiative reinforce and
complement the principles and security measures set out in the aforementioned cybersecurity
regulatory framework. It is designed to enhance the security and trust in the technical framework
designed to facilitate the exchange of health data both for primary and secondary use.

The NIS Directive is being revised (the ‘NIS2 proposal45) and is currently undergoing negotiations
with the co-legislators. It aims to raise the EU common level of ambition of the cybersecurity
regulatory framework, through a wider scope, clearer rules and stronger supervision tools. The
Commission proposal addresses these issues across three pillars: (1) Member State capabilities; (2)
risk management; (3) cooperation and information exchange. Operators in the healthcare system
remain under the scope.

A proposal for a Cyber Resilience Act is also planned for adoption by the Commission in 2022,
with the aim to set out horizontal cybersecurity requirements for digital products and ancillary
services. The envisaged set of essential cybersecurity requirements to be laid down by the Cyber
Resilience Act will be applied to all sectors and categories of digital products whose producers and
vendors shall comply with, before placing the products on the market or, as applicable, when
putting them into service and also through the entire product lifecycle. These requirements will be
of general nature and technology neutral. The security requirements set out in the EHDS, notably as
regards EHR systems, will provide more specific requirements in certain areas, such as access
control.

     4. eID framework

The initiative would build on the new framework for eID, including the Digital eID Wallet. This
would allow the online identification of patients. A pilot project has been launched in 2021 and
aims to support the access of patients to their data, including in the context of MyHealth@EU.

     5. Medical device and pharmaceutical regulatory framework

The medical device regulatory framework is composed of the medical devices Regulation
(2017/745/EU) and the in vitro diagnostic medical devices Regulation (2017/746/EU). These


45    Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on measures for a high common level of cybersecurity
      across the Union, repealing Directive (EU) 2016/1148, COM(2020) 823 final
regulations include provisions related to the assessment and marketing authorisation of medical
devices in the Union.

The EU legal framework for human medicines sets standards to ensure a high level of public health
protection and the quality, safety and efficacy of authorised medicines. The requirements and
procedures for marketing authorisation, as well as the rules for monitoring authorised products, are
primarily laid down in Directive 2001/83/EC and in Regulation (EC) No 726/2004. They also
include harmonised provisions for the manufacture, wholesale or advertising of medicinal products
for human use.

Additionally, EU legislation provides for common rules for the conduct of clinical trials in the EU.
Various rules have also been adopted to address the particularities of certain types of medicinal
products and promote research in specific areas46.

The EHDS initiative complements the aims and scopes of the aforementioned Regulations and
Directives by providing access to a wide range of health data that could be useful for regulatory
purposes and enhance and streamline the collection of the necessary health data required to assess
and supervise the introduction and surveillance of pharmaceutical products and devices in the
Union.

     6. Relationship with other initiatives

On 25 November 2020, the Commission adopted a proposal for a Regulation on European Data
Governance (“Data Governance Act”). The proposal sets out an overarching framework
encompassing horizontal measures for all common European data spaces, and leaves room for
sector-specific rules, governance mechanisms and standards where relevant. The proposal
complements the Directive on open data and the reuse of public sector information (Open Data
Directive)47. EHDS would use the DGA framework for data altruism and competent bodies
supporting access to data (Article 7 DGA) through a secure processing environment. For data
altruism, such activities could be carried out by Data Access Bodies or DABs, in collaboration with
DGA bodies, which could request specific aspects from other entities caring out data altruism
activities. With regards to competent bodies to support access to health data, the National Health
Data Access bodies could be built around Article 7 DGA bodies and their secure environment, with
additional tasks related to providing authorisations to data.




       46
          Medicinal products for rare diseases (‘Orphan medicines’) (Regulation (EC) No 141/2000, Medicinal products
       for children (Regulation (EC) No 1901/2006, Advanced therapy medicinal products (Regulation (EC) No
       1394/2007.


47
     OJ L 172, 26.6.2019, p. 56–83.
       Figure 10. Comparison between the Data Governance Act and the European Health Data Space.

Further EU legislative action on issues that affect relations between actors in the data-agile
economy in order to provide incentives for horizontal data sharing across sectors (complementing
data sharing within sectors) could be taken forward in the Data Act.

The EHDS initiative will build upon the horizontal framework on data to complement it and
provide more specific rules for the health sector. For instance, it is important for the trustworthiness
of the system that decisions concerning access to and further processing of health data, applicable
rules and policies are taken by health (data) authorities and health policy makers within the
appropriate framework. Similarly, the relevant health authorities should be involved in the selection
of standards in the health area and in the notification of data intermediaries in the health sector to
take into account the specific requirements, standards and specifications for the processing of health
data. As the sensitivity of health data demands a high level of trust for citizens to voluntarily
provide their health data for altruistic purposes; competent sectoral bodies should be in involved in
such data altruism schemes when they relate to health data.

It would also build on upcoming Data Act, especially on its provisions of portability and access of
data from private sector.

In April 2021, the Commission published a proposal for a regulation laying down harmonised
rules on artificial intelligence (artificial intelligence act). This proposal constitutes a central part
of the EU digital single market strategy. The primary objective of this proposal is to ensure the
proper functioning of the internal market. The proposal sets out common mandatory rules
concerning the placing on the market, putting into service and use of AI systems. Additionally, it
contains certain specific rules on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of
personal data. It follows a risk-based approach, differentiating between (i) unacceptable risks (ii)
high risks and (iii) low or minimal risks. The proposal identifies two main categories of high-risk
AI systems: (i) AI systems intended to be used as safety components of products that are subject to
third party ex-ante conformity assessment and (ii) other stand-alone AI with mainly fundamental
rights implications expressly listed in Annex III. There are legal requirements that are set out for
high-risk AI systems concerning data and data governance, documentation and record keeping,
transparency and provision of information to users, human oversight, robustness, accuracy and
security. The precise technical solutions to achieve compliance with those requirements may be
provided by standards or by other technical specifications or otherwise be developed according to
general engineering or scientific knowledge at the discretion of the provider of the AI system.

Health data play a key role in the training, validation, testing and post-market monitoring of AI in
healthcare. The aim of establishing the EHDS is to also aid providers and users of AI as well as
notified bodies and market surveillance authorities to carry out their tasks and effectively and
efficiently fulfil their legal obligations under the AIA. The possibility to access diverse and a large
amount of organized data within the EHDS infrastructure that provide transparency and information
concerning the characteristics of these data would lead to the speedy development, upscale and
uptake of trustworthy AI in healthcare. For instance, health data within the EHDS could share
common standards and/or follow common rules and guidelines on issues like annotation, labelling,
prevention of bias and avoidance of errors. Additionally, information might be provided on the
characteristics of data within the EHDS infrastructure that would enable the developer of AI
systems to use appropriate data to train, test and validate algorithms that reflect the geographical,
behavioural or functional setting within which the AI system is intended to be used. In this regard,
Health Data Access Bodies and/or national bodies might be involved to develop and oversee
common rules.

The set-up of the EHDS wouldbe an integral part of building a European Health Union, a process
launched by the adoption of a first set of proposals to reinforce preparedness and response during
health crisis48, which pave the way for the participation of the European Medicines Agency (EMA)
and the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) in the future EHDS
infrastructure, along with research institutes, public health bodies, and Health Data Access Bodies
in the Member States.

European Health Emergency preparedness and Response Authority (HERA)49 is a central element
for strengthening the European Health Union with better EU preparedness and response to serious
cross-border health threats, by enabling rapid availability, access and distribution of needed
countermeasures. The proposal provides synergies with the Union’s Digital Single Market agenda
and EHDS, by encouraging research and innovation, facilitating the access and sharing of data and
information and data, and supporting the monitoring medical countermeasures.

On 25 November 2020, the European Commission adopted a Pharmaceutical Strategy50 for
Europe with the stated aim at creating a future proof regulatory framework and at supporting
industry in promoting research and technologies. It will ensure that patients have access to
innovative and affordable medicines, and will support the competitiveness, innovative capacity and
sustainability of the EU’s pharmaceutical industry. One of the EHDS aims is to establish
interoperable data access infrastructure, which will improve exchange, federated access and cross-


48
   Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EC) No 851/2004
establishing a European Centre for disease prevention and control, Proposal for a Regulation of the European
Parliament and of the Council on serious cross-border threats to health and repealing Decision No 1082/2013/EU,
Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on a reinforced role for the European
Medicines Agency in crisis preparedness and management for medicinal products and medical devices.
49
           https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/default/files/preparedness_response/docs/hera_2021_propcouncreg_medical-
      countermeasures_en.pdf
50
     https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52020DC0761&rid=3
border analysis of health data in the EU, while ensuring the necessary safeguards and citizens’
control over their own health data. The Commission will propose to revise the pharmaceutical
legislation to consider how to make best use of digital transformation. This includes new methods
of evidence generation and assessment, such as analysis of big and real-world data to support the
development, authorisation and use of medicines51. EMA will be a node in the EHDS infrastrucrure
for secondary use of health data.

The European Commission’s “Europe’s Beating Cancer Plan”52 and the recently launched
Horizon Europe Mission on Cancer53 also emphasise the need for better collecting and using
health data in order to tackle inequalities, survivorship, advance research. The smart combination of
health data and new technologies caters for the exponential development of personalised medicine,
which becomes a powerful tool to address cancer through tailor-made prevention and treatment
strategies so patients receive the therapies that work best for them, and no money is wasted on trial
and error treatments.54 It is important to make the most of the potential of health digitalisation,
through EHDS to improve cancer treatment, healthcare delivery and quality of life outcomes.




51
   https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52020DC0761&rid=3
52
   https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/default/files/non_communicable_diseases/docs/eu_cancer-plan_en.pdf
53
   EU Mission: Cancer | European Commission (europa.eu)
54
   https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/default/files/non_communicable_diseases/docs/eu_cancer-plan_en.pdf
ANNEX 7: LIST OF M-HEALTH AND TELEHEALTH INITIATIVES (LEGISLATION, FRAMEWORKS AND
   CERTIFICATION/LABELS)

Examples of legislative frameworks for the telemedicine in MS

In order to implement digital health products, Member States often have a use case approach, such as chronic diseases
or rare diseases. This approach makes it possible to test products and services on a small and often more voluntary
population because they are severely affected. Denmark, for example, has implemented telemedicine services for
patients with COPD.

Countries can then extend the most successful services to the rest of the population, as in the case of telemedicine in
France, Germany and Italy.

Finally, health crisis episodes, such as the Covid crisis, have lifted certain access limitations, such as the obligation to
consult the doctor in person before a teleconsultation

In Denmark, telemedicine is specifically targeted at patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)
who tend to have frequent visits to a clinic.

In Estonia, since March 2013, consultation of the family doctor with a specialist is reimbursed by the Estonian Health
Insurance Fund (EHIF). The specialist provides his instructions for treatment (by e-mail or other means) and receives
68% of the normal rate for a face-to-face consultation (Kruus et al., 2015).

Finland has had a telemedicine strategy since 1995. Teleradiology has become regular practice and is the main
telemedicine act in Finland. Most district hospitals provide teleradiology and telelaboratory services and offer
teleconsultation for primary healthcare centres. These activities are partially covered by the healthcare system and the
budget of the healthcare centres. Other telemedicine services provided are telepsychiatry, teleopthalmology,
teledermatology and teledentistry. Most telemedicine projects, focusing on teleconsultation and telemonitoring, were
funded by public funds and EU projects (Khatri et al., 2011).

In Germany, according to the professional codes, diagnoses and prescriptions have to be provided after a face-to-face
meeting between the patient and the physician and after an examination. Teleconsultations are possible for follow-up
purposes and have been eligible for financial compensation since 2017, as have tele-expertise services (Hantson, 2019).
Since the ban on tele-therapy only applies if the practising physician is a member of the German medical association
(Bundesärztekammer), it does not apply to telemedicine provided by health providers outside the territory (Europe
Economics 2019).

In France, teleconsultation has been reimbursed since 2018 at the same rate as a normal consultation, as long as there is
a prior therapeutic relationship between the health professional and the patient. Tele-expertise has been funded since
February 2019. Two levels of tele-expertise are defined, depending on the complexity of the telemedicine services
provided (low difficulty and patient with chronic disease).

In Italy, many telemedicine projects have been initiated but only a few were sustainable. Telemonitoring and
teleradiology are considered established practices, while telepathology, teledermatology and telepsychiatry, in the form
of teleconsultation and tele-expertise, exist as pilot projects or informal practices (World Health Organization, 2016).
Telemonitoring pilot projects are being implemented at a regional level by the regional health authorities
(AziendaSanitaria Locale, ASL) (Rojahn et al., 2016).

In the Netherlands, since 2019, it has been made easier for health care providers and health insurers to include digital
consultations in funding agreements. For GPs it no longer matters how the doctor organizes the consultation with the
patient: in the consultation room, by telephone, by e-mail or using other digital means. In specialist medical care it has
become easier to fund remote monitoring of patients. Attempts have also been made to implement telemonitoring for
heart failure and diabetes in Dutch hospitals (Kroneman et al., 2016; Faber et al., 2017).

In Portugal, a national telehealth strategy and policy was implemented in 2013. One third of hospitals have offered
telemedicine services since 2014 (Pina 2015; Dias 2017). Since 2013, the Health System administration has funded
several telemonitoring projects. Local authorities have created a certification for teleconsultation. When a
teleconsultation is required between a specialist and a patient, primary care units appoint a coordinator or the patient’s
own General Practitioner to assist during the consultation (Oliveira et al. 2014). More than half of hospitals use remote
screening, particularly in the area of dermatology, and have carried out teleconsultations (The Portugal news 2019).

To be noted: in Norway, most telemedicine services are available through projects. There is however a disparity
between implementation by the Norwegian government and the actual use of telemedicine (Alami et al. 2017).

                                                    Source: Bensemmane et al. 201955


Examples of European cross-border telemedicine projects

      Below are some relevant examples of currently running telemedicine initiatives in a cross-border context, used to
      illustrate the implementation of digital health practices across Europe.

                                 56
           Pomerania project is mainly funded by the European Commission (up to 84%) and involves 20 German and
            15 Polish hospitals. It aims at enlarging the healthcare services offered in a region with a low density of hospitals
            and covers fields such as radiology, urology, stroke care, cardiology, oncology, ophthalmology, ear, nose and
            throat illnesses.

           The European Stroke Organisation is a Swiss organisation bringing together European stroke experts and aims
                                                                                       57
            at improving the delivery of stroke services. They produce guidelines           for the implementation of a tele-stroke
            network in Europe in a practical way.

           The university hospitals of Aachen (Germany) and Maastricht (the Netherlands) share the services of one
            neurophysiologist, through the use of telemedicine practices for certain procedures. Surgeons are able to operate
            on a patient at Aachen Hospital while the neurophysiologist in Maastricht follows the operation on a screen and
            monitors the patient’s condition.

           In 2006, Denmark and Sweden started a telepsychiatry collaboration for asylum seekers and migrants. Only one
            Danish hospital had a cross-cultural expertise (Mucic 2008) and the study showed a good acceptance of patients
            towards telemedicine and an appreciation to exchange with a healthcare professional without an interpreter.

           A shared software platform has been created between France and Swiss in order to establish collaborative
            diagnosis, to study neuroimaging, as well as to access virtual examination. A virtual network is even used to
            transfer diagnosis from university hospital Basel to collaborating German district hospitals.
      However, it is important to stress the fact that the cross-border initiatives identified above are generally located in small
      border regions, funded by the European Union, specialised in a specific therapeutic area and often poorly documented.


Source: Author’s elaborations in Lupiáñez-Villanueva, et al. (2022).

Examples of m-health/tele-health assessment frameworks and certification/labels

DiGA58

MS                      Germany
Covered services        CE marked mobile health applications



55
   Bensemmane, S. and Baeten, R. (2019), Cross-border telemedicine: practices and challenges. OSE Working Paper
     Series, Research Paper No.44 Brussels: European Social Observatory, October, 63p.
56
      https://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/en/projects/germany/telemedicine-pomerania-improves-healthcare-in-sparsely-
       populated-regions
57
         https://www.telemedecine-360.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/2018-ESO-Recommendations-on-telestroke-in-
       Europe.pdf
58
   https://www.bfarm.de/EN/MedicalDevices/DiGA/_node.html
                       Application for reimbursement
Bodies involved        Public bodies
                          National medicines agencies (Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices – BfArM)
Criteria                    Technical requirements
                                  o Security
                                  o Functionality
                                  o Quality (confirmed by CE marking)
                                  o Impact on health
                                  o Data protection, data security
                                  o Interoperability
                            Positive care effects
                                  o Medical benefits
                                  o Structural and procedural improvement
Scheme                 Certification by the BfArM
Typology               Digital Healthcare Act (Digitale-Versorgung-Gesetz, DVG) on 19 December 2019


mHealth Belgium59
MS                     Belgium
Covered services       CE marked mobile health applications
Bodies involved        Public bodies
                            eHealth agencies (eHealth Belgium, mHealth Belgium),
                            National medicines agency (AFMPS – Agence Fédérale du Médicament et Produits de
                               Santé),
                            National sickness fund and insurers (INAMI - Institut National d’Assurance Maladie
                               Invalidité)
Criteria                   1. CE-marking
                           2. Interoperability
                           3. Socio-economic value added
Scheme                 Three-level certification
                            Level 1– basic requirements
                                o CE declaration as a medical device is submitted
                                o Voluntary notification of the mobile app to the Federal Agency for Medicines and
                                     Health Products (FAMHP), during which the CE marking and the compliance with
                                     the rules and regulations for medical devices are confirmed and can be checked.
                                o The app and the parent company declare that they comply with the EU General
                                     Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).
                            Level 2– interoperability criteria
                                o Level 1 certified
                                o have been submitted to a risk assessment (developed by an independent
                                     organisation and included in mHealthBelgium) after which they have proven to
                                     meet all imposed criteria regarding authentication, security and the use of local e-
                                     health services by means of standardised tests (if applicable).
                            Level 3– reimbursement
                                o Proof of socio-economic value added
                                o Certification operated by the national social fund
Typology               Framework



59
     https://mhealthbelgium.be/validation-pyramid
ANS eHealth Label

MS                 France
Covered services   Software and health establishment
Bodies involved    Public bodies
                         National eHealth authority (ANS – Agence du Numérique en Santé)
Criteria           For healthcare professionals and software developers
                   Garanty the basic functions for medical exercise, coordinated care, monitoring, administration
                   of the establishement
Scheme             Label delivered by the French eHealth agency
Typology           Framework



HAS mHealth

MS                 France
Covered services   Mobile applications with no medical specific purpose
                   Specific for the “grey” zone of mHealth applications
Bodies involved    Public bodies
                        National health authority (HAS – Haute Autorité de Santé)
Criteria           Four main axes
                        delivering reliable and quality health information,
                        either technically efficient,
                        guaranteeing the confidentiality and security of personal data
                        being ergonomic and easy to use
Scheme             Guidances for mobile applications developers
Typology           Guidelines



MAST CIMT

MS                 Denmark
Covered services   Telemedicine
Bodies involved    Public bodies
                        Centre for Innovative Medical Technology (CIMT). Research center from a university
                           and a university hospital.
Criteria           The model defines the relevant assessment framework for the effect of telemedicine:
                       1. the patient and the technology,
                       2. patient safety,
                       3. clinical effectiveness,
                       4. patient perspectives,
                       5. economic aspects,
                       6. organisational aspects,
                       7. legal and ethical aspects.
Scheme             Assessment framework for managers in the healthcare sector.
Typology           Framework



Source: Author’s elaborations in Lupiáñez-Villanueva, et al. (2022).
Quality criteria: standards ISO/CEN 82304-2

  At the request of DG CNECT, CEN and ISO are working towards standards on eHealth assessment criteria under
  this standard split into five areas, including quality aspects: (1) Medical safety, (2) Usability, (3) Security of
  personal data, (4) Technical quality, (5) Quality of the app. This work is guided by other frameworks and studies’
  questions about health and safety, health requirements, ethics, health benefits, societal benefits, health risks,
  accessibility, privacy and security, and interoperability. This work could especially be used to support labelling at
  an EU level.

  The Dutch Ministry of Health has commissioned the National eHealth LIving Lab (NeLL, Leiden University
  Medical Center) to build a national health app assessment framework based on CEN-ISO 82304-2 and to advise
  how to execute such a framework. A comparative study has been led on several app assessment frameworks,
  including those from Haute Autorité de Santé (France), mHealth Belgium, DiGA (Germany), Digital Technology
  Assessment (United Kingdom) and existing Dutch frameworks. The aim was to establish which requirements
  overlap with CEN-ISO and which are not yet covered in CEN-ISO and should be considered as additional Dutch
  requirements, and significant overlaps have been found in subjects covered. It concludes that CEN-ISO standard
  covers the national requirements well, with a few exceptions.


Source: Author’s elaborations in Lupiáñez-Villanueva, et al. (2022).
ANNEX 8: OVERVIEW OF THE GDPR LEGAL BASIS FOR PROCESSING HEALTH DATA FOR
       DIFFERENT PURPOSES60



Please indicate the legal basis under GDPR Articles 6 (1) and derogation basis under Article 9(2)
used for processing health data for normal healthcare provision purposes within the context of a
patient - healthcare professional relationship. Please note this is for regular data processing, not
data processing in an emergency situation, where the vital interest basis may be used.




GDPR Article 15 stipulates that data subjects (including patients) have a right to access data
concerning them. Please indicate the way in which this right may be exercised in your Member
State. Note: this question does not relate to research data.




Article 17 of the GDPR provides that in certain cases a data subject can ask for data to be erased
or have ‘the right to be forgotten’. However, Article 17(3) of the GDPR provides that the right shall
not apply to the extent that processing is necessary for reasons of public interest in the area of
public health in accordance with Article 9(2)( h) and (i) of the GDPR. If not based on article 17 a
limitation to the right to be forgotten in healthcare could also be based on article 23. Please
indicate if a patient may have medical records deleted in your Member State.




GDPR Article 20 stipulates that if the data collection was based on consent or on the basis of the
creation or execution of a contract, the data subject (patient) has a right to obtain a portable copy


60
     European Commission (2020). Assessment of the EU Member States rules on health data in the light of GDPR.
       https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/health/files/ehealth/docs/ms_rules_health-data_en.pdf (Annexes available at:
       https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/default/files/ehealth/docs/ms_rules_health-data_annex_en.pdf).
of the data. Please indicate which of the following apply in your Member State Note: this question
does not relate to research data, see question 34. (Q33).




If you have selected the last option above, please describe why Article 20 does not pertain to patient
data




Please indicate if any specific legislation has been adopted in your Member State that addresses the
processing of health data that was originally collected for the purpose of providing care to allow it
to be used for planning, management, administration and improvement of the health and care
systems entities such as health authorities.
If yes, please indicate which combination of legal bases the legislation relies upon when data are
used for planning, management, administration and improvement of the health and care systems:
(more than one answer may be applicable as different types of organisation might process data for
such purposes).




Please indicate if any specific legislation has been adopted in your Member State that addresses the
processing of health data that was originally collected for the purpose of providing care to allow it
to be used for market approval of medicines and devices, such as medicines agencies, EMA, HTA
and Notified Bodies.
If yes, please indicate which combination of legal bases the legislation relies upon when data are
used for market approval of medicines and devices. (More than one answer may be applicable as
different types of organisation might process data for such purposes)
Please indicate if any specific legislation has been adopted in your Member State that addresses the
processing of health data that was originally collected for the purpose of providing care to allow it
to be used for monitoring of medical device safety and/or pharmacovigilance.
If yes, please indicate which combination of legal bases are relied upon when data are used for
monitoring of medical device safety and/or pharmacovigilance.




Please indicate if any specific legislation has been adopted in your Member State that addresses the
processing of health data that was originally collected for the purpose of providing care to allow it
to be used for protecting against serious cross-border threats to health. (Q20).
NOTE: some threats are classified as reportable in WHO’s International Health Regulations, and
therefore intentional law may also apply to this issue (see question 22 below).




All EU Member States are required to report diagnosis and outcome of the diseases covered by the
WHO International Health Regulation, which now also includes COVID-19. Has your Member
State enacted any national level specific legislation about other cross-border health threats, such as
food borne diseases, sexually transmitted diseases, which are not covered by the IHR?
If yes, please indicate which combination of legal bases are relied upon when data are used for
protecting against such potentially serious cross-border threats to health.
Please state if any specific legislation has been adopted that addresses the processing of health
data that was originally collected for the purpose of providing care, by third-party public-sector
researchers, i.e. by a different controller than that where the treating healthcare professionals were
based. If yes, please indicate which legal base in Article 9(2) is relied upon when data are used for
research by third-party public-sector researchers.




Please state if any specific legislation has been adopted that addresses the processing of health
data that was originally collected for the purpose of providing care, by third party researchers not
in the public sector – i.e. researchers based in not for profit organisations, researchers based in
industrial or commercial research organisations and researchers based in other privately funded
research organisations. If yes, please indicate which legal base in Article 9(2) is relied upon by
such third-party researchers not in the public sector.
ANNEX 9: OVERVIEW OF NATIONAL BODIES DEALING WITH SECONDARY USES OF HEALTH DATA61

Data altruism in place or desirable to set up at national or EU level
Is a system for data altruism in        Total
place?                                  MS
Yes in place, or in process of          2          DK, DE, [UK]
being implemented
No                                      25         BE, BG, CZ, EE, IE, GR, ES, FR, HR, IT, CY, LV, LT, LU, HU, MT,
                                                   NL, AT, PL, PT, RO, SI, SK, FI, SE
If no, do you believe that a system of data altruism should be set up at national level?
Yes                                     14       BG, CZ, EE, IE, GR, ES, HR, CY, LV, MT, NL, RO, SK, FI
No                                      1        SI
Not sure                                10       BE, DK, FR, IT, LT, LU, HU, AT, PL, PT
Do you believe that a system of data altruism should be set up at EU level?
Yes                                     11       BE, BG, CZ, DE, EE, GR, LV, LT, HU, SK, FI
No                                      5        ES, IT, CY, NL, SI, [UK]
Not sure                                11       DK, IE, FR, HR, LU, MT, AT, PL, PT, RO, SE
* To illustrate the responses, EE answered both yes and no, with the clarification that the answer in the current settings would be
‘no’, and to be changed to ‘yes’ if first clear regulations with responsibilities were set in place.


                          Findata, Finland
Description
                          Findata is the brand new Finnish Health Data Access Body, acting as ‘one-stop-shop’ for
                          health and social data access, in operation since January 2020 (www.findata.fi). The
                          services Findata provides are to 1) grant data permits to data from multiple registers; 2)
                          collect the requested data from the controllers and then combining, pseudonymising and
                          anonymising the data or producing statistical data, and 3) deliver the data for use to the
                          requestor for use in a secure remote IT environment, potentially also by converting and
                          combining the permit holder’s own data.
Background
                          Findata was set up with the goal to enable fast, easy and safe access to health and social
                          personal data. Before, one had to request access to all data controllers separately, which
                          was a very time-consuming and administrative process. On top of that, data was not
                          processed in a secure and controlled way.
                          Findata started operating in steps. Since January 2020, data requests for statistical data
                          can be made. Since April 2020, data permit applications can be issued. From January
                          2021, Kanta services, where medical records are stored, will be included. Up to 12
                          October 2020, a total of 230 data applications were received, of which 143 data permits
                          for personal data and 35 data requests for statistical data.
Legislation
                          The Act on the Secondary Use of Health and Social Data (552/2019) specifies the
                          purposes for which one can request data access. It applies to register based research, and
                          not to clinical trial data. Genome and biobank legislation are on its way. The Act among
                          others also specifies that personal data can be used for the following purposes, even if
                          the data was not collected for that purpose: 1) statistics, 2) scientific research, 3)



61
     European Commission (2020). Assessment of the EU Member States rules on health data in the light of GDPR.
       https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/health/files/ehealth/docs/ms_rules_health-data_en.pdf (Annexes available at:
       https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/default/files/ehealth/docs/ms_rules_health-data_annex_en.pdf).
                       development and innovation activities*, 4) education, 5) knowledge management, 6)
                       steering and supervision of social and health care by authorities, and 7) planning and
                       reporting duty of an authority. Further details of the implications of the act on services
                       provided are described below.
                       * From this list of purposes, the purpose of ‘development and innovation’ only allows for
                       the use of statistical data.
Tasks and activities   Findata is a completely new system but builds on a long history of registries and a
                       digitalised society. The main tasks relate to the three services described above. Findata
                       offers services for those needing data (customers) and for those controlling data
                       (controllers), all relate to the secondary use of health and social data. To make a data
                       request for personal rather than statistical data, it is possible since April 2020 to apply for
                       a data permit to access pseudonymised personal data for all above mentioned purposes,
                       including e.g. function 2 purposes of authorities’ planning and reporting duties. Only
                       exception is the purpose of ‘development and innovation’, which only allows for the use
                       of statistical data.
                       Findata serves users of data by compiling a dataset and providing access to a secure
                       environment to process the data. Findata cooperates with data controllers to standardize
                       data descriptions. It also provides an anonymisation service and a permit processing
                       service if the controller authorises Findata to do so.
                       The Act also describes the responsibilities and tasks of both Findata, as Health Data
                       Access Body, plus a predefined set of authorities and organisations, for the secondary
                       use of data in the registers (being eleven different authorities and organisations such as
                       the Ministry of Social Affairs and Health, the National Institute for Health and Welfare
                       (THL), the Finnish Medicines Agency (Fimea) and public service organisers of health
                       and social care) regarding the following elements:
                        a) Data set descriptions
                        b) Advisory service
                        c) Collection, combination and pre-processing service for data
                        d) Identifier administration service
                        e) Data request management system
                        f) Secure hosting service
                       The Act also demands the IT-systems used for secondary use of social and health data to
                       be audited against Findata’s regulations by a Data Security Assessment Body. Findata is
                       currently preparing to give regulations on the requirements for secure IT-environment for
                       using and managing data for secondary use.
Governance
                       Findata is an independent central agency which falls under the responsibility of the
                       Finnish Institute of Health and Welfare (THL). A steering group, consisting of
                       representatives from data controllers whose data Findata provides access to, develops
                       and guides Findata’s operations. The Data Protection Ombudsman, Parliamentary
                       Ombudsman and Valvira1 supervise the operations of Findata and compliance with the
                       Secondary Use Act.
                       1
                        Valvira is a national agency operating under the Ministry of Social Affairs and Health,
                       charged with, amongst others, the supervision of the social and health care.
Organisation and
                       The budget of Findata is set by the temporary steering group who was preparing the
budget
                       implementation of the Act on the Secondary use of Health and Social Data. After a start-
                       up budget in the beginning years 2019-2021, the annual budget is about 1 million euros
                       per year, with the main expense items being personnel costs and ICT-systems. Since it is
                       a new system, there is no data yet about the real yearly costs and gains of running
                       Findata, but it is anticipated that the set budget will not be sufficient, and may be raised
                       to over 2 million annually.
Staff and functions
                       There are currently 15 staff working for Findata, and recruitments are going on. It is
                       expected that in a few years 20-25 staff will be employed. Functions of the staff are in
                     the field of ICT, communications, law (DPO), metadata and data services.
Data sources and
                     Via Findata social and health data can be accessed from various public institutions,
types of data
                     private institutions and registries. The sources of data for which Findata can issue
                     permits are specified in the Secondary Use Act.
                     Findata grants permissions for data collected both in public and private sector services
                     which are part of the relevant data sources. According to Finnish legislation, only an
                     official authority can grant permission to use Finnish citizen’s personal data. Therefore,
                     even if the data is collected at private doctor’s surgery, the private health clinic does not
                     have the power to grant permits for secondary use.
                     Data granted by Findata can be combined with data from other countries, and this can be
                     done in two directions: it is possible to transfer Finnish data to secure environments in
                     other countries, and it is possible to import data from other countries to Finland, either to
                     Findata remote access system or to a secure audited environment maintained by some
                     other organisation. Both forms have already been applied in several cases. Data can only
                     be taken out of the remote access environment and disclosed to another secure user
                     environment in exceptional cases. However, this is sometimes necessary due to
                     restrictions from other remote access environments when data needs to be combined.
Foreign data users   In Finland currently, the submission of a data permit application is possible for persons
                     who have a personal identity code registered in the Finnish Population Information
                     System. Findata is mapping alternative secure identification applications for its
                     international users. Hence, in the future, it should also be possible for foreign
                     stakeholders to request a data permit, however, there is not yet a standardized way to
                     control the identity of the foreign applicant. When applying is possible, there will be no
                     additional protective restrictions for non-Finnish data users (such as having a Finnish
                     research partner).
                     Processing data in the remote access environment of Findata when being in a third
                     country (outside the EU/EEA) is possible if there are appropriate safeguards in
                     accordance with Chapter V of the GDPR. Non-EU stakeholders applying require more
                     paperwork and possibly (EU standard) agreements, and the fee is higher.
User fees
                     The price of Findata services are defined in the Valtion maksuperustelaki (State Basis of
                     Payment Act) and detailed in the Decree of the Ministry of Social Affairs and Health
                     Fees for the services of the Social and Health Information Licensing Authority of 30
                     December 2019.
                     For its public services, a processing fee is charged that must correspond to the amount of
                     the total cost to the state of producing the performance (cost value). The fee (of 115 EUR
                     per working hour) is determined based on the hours worked to produce the output (by
                     means of data aggregation, pre-processing, pseudonymisation and anonymisation). The
                     fee may be below the cost value of the service or may not be charged at all if there are
                     justified reasons related to health and medical care, other social purposes, the
                     administration of justice, environmental protection, educational activities or general
                     cultural activities.
                     In the above mentioned decree, a fixed fee based on the average cost value applies for
                     the following services:
                      A data permit for a permit applicant established in Finland or another EU or EEA
                       country of 1,000 EUR;
                      A data permit for an applicant established in a non-EU or non-EEA country of 3,000
                       EUR,
                         a change of data permit for a permit applicant 350 EUR.
                         a decision concerning a data request with a fee of 1,000 EUR.
                         A data permit related to a thesis and a decision on the information request for an
                          applicant who is domiciled in Finland or another EU or EEA country of 500 EUR. 62
                        In addition, Findata provides remote access environment services, which are
                        commercially priced services subject to a fee (VAT +24%). Such packages can range
                        from a Small Package (8 GB) of 2,250 EUR/year to an XL Package (90 GB) of 8,500
                        EUR/year.
Pseudony-misation/
                        One can access statistical level data via a data request and individual level data via a data
anonymisation
                        permit. In principle, individual level data is available in a pseudonymised or anonymous
                        format, dependent on what is requested. Access to data with direct identifiers is not
                        excluded, but only granted under strict conditions and fitting with the data applicant’s
                        processing purposes.
* Sources of information: findata.fi, legal technical survey by national country correspondent, and correspondence with
relevant experts.




                          Health Data Hub (HDH), France


Description               The Health Data Hub (HDH) is a unique gateway to health data in France. The HDH’s vision
                          is to ensure a simple, unified, transparent and secure access to health data for public interest
                          research with the goal to improve the quality of care and patient support. The HDH is a
                          platform where pseudonymised health data from different sources is duplicated and made
                          available. It is both an infrastructure and a health database catalogue, and offers related
                          services, allowing project coordinators to access data and/or link different databases. The role
                          of the HDH is to give access to health data, promote the collection and consolidation of data,
                          to accompany data exploitation, to support the research community and to ensure the link with
                          civil society. The aim of the HDH is to federate all health data stakeholders, and to facilitate
                          access to various data sources (public/private) while ensuring high standards of transparency
                          and privacy.



Background                The origin of the HDH stems from a report written in 2018 ‘For a meaningful AI’, where
                          deputy and Fields Medal mathematician Cédric Villani recommended a single point of entry
                          to access health data, as health was defined to be a key strategic sector for the development of
                          AI in France. Following the report, President Macron announced the creation of the HDH. An
                          in-depth study mapped the obstacles in the secondary use of health data in France, which
                          resulted in a roadmap ‘code of conduct’ for the HDH.
                          The HDH aims to become the single entry point to French health data. This system is being
                          implemented to harmonize health data access in France and to address quality and
                          interoperability issues of the various databases are a key part of the HDH governance model.




62
  The price related to the thesis is applied if the application concerns a research project that produces one thesis. If the
application concerns a project that produces more than one thesis or a project that produces one or more theses and
other outputs, a normal data request decision or data permit fee (EUR 1,000.00) will be charged.
Legislation             The Law of July 24th 2019 on the Organisation and Transformation of the Health System is
                        the main legislative text which sets up the HDH as a public interest group (GIP) to be the main
                        gateway to operate public interest research on the National Health Data System (SNDS).
                        The scope of the latter has been increased by that same law to all health data fully and
                        partially reimbursed by national solidarity. In addition, the HDH hosts an independent Ethical
                        and Scientific Committee for Research, Studies and Evaluations (CESREES).




Tasks and activities    The missions of the HDH can be summarized in four main areas:
                         -    Supporting data controllers in the collection, consolidation and development of their
                              assets;
                         -    Offering all project coordinators simplified and fast access to health data;
                         -    Guaranteeing transparency towards civil society and ensuring respect for citizens’ rights;
                         -    Innovating alongside research and industry players.


Governance              The HDH takes the legal form of a public interest group (GIP) governed by public law. The
                        HDH takes over the missions of its predecessor, the National Institute for Health Data (INDS)
                        as the single entry point for health data access in France. It is also responsible for health data
                        access governance as it hosts the secretariat of the CESREES, the ethical and scientific
                        committee for health research, studies and evaluations, which evaluates requests for access to
                        the data catalogue.
                        The missions of the HDH are determined through article L. 1462-1 of the Public Health Code.
                        The health data platform, with its governance set up by decree, is composed of 56 entities that
                        represent the State, organisations ensuring representation of patients and users of the health
                        system, producers of health data, public and private users of health data, including health
                        research organisations, among others.



Organisation      and   The HDH is a single point of entry data governance model, providing access for all
budget                  researchers to data currently stored in the HDH (and SNDS). The data remains stored with the
                        original data controller. The Health Data Hub is a central body, but does not incorporate all
                        data. For example, biobanks and registries have their own systems.
                        The project results are made public on the website of the HDH, with due respect for academic
                        and industrial competitiveness.
                        As for budget, the HDH is currently funded by the public sector. Before the official creation of
                        the public interest group, the Health Data Hub project was conducted under the direction of
                        the Ministry of Solidarity and Health (Directorate of Research, Studies, Evaluation and
                        Statistics (DREES)) and was selected in the Big Data and Artificial Intelligence call for
                        projects of the Fund for the Transformation of Public Action (FTAP). In this context, it was
                        granted initial funding of 36 million euros for four years. A further 40 million euros came
                        from the national health insurance expenditure target (L’Objectif national de dépenses
                        d’assurance maladie, ONDAM).



Staff and functions     As of end of 2020, around 50 people are working for the Health Data Hub. The Hub is
                        planned to grow further.
Data sources      and    The HDH can provide access to any pseudonymised health data that is reimbursed partially or
types of data            fully by national public solidarity in France. This includes the national claims database, as
                         well as in the future numerous other databases to be included in its catalogue, such as cohorts,
                         clinical data, genomics data etc.



Data users               Data access is only allowed for public interest research, with a strictly defined project duration
                         and a limited scope upon approval by the Scientific and Ethics Committee (CESREES) and
                         the national DPA (CNIL). Data is accessible via a customized secure project space, containing
                         only the needed dataset and offering a variety of data analytics tools. The data processor
                         cannot directly retrieve data from the platform.
                         Any private actor requesting access to the data will have to prove that the project is of public
                         interest, for the benefit of citizens, in the same way as public actors.



Foreign data users       Data access can be granted to data users from other EU countries.
                         The HDH contributes to the dissemination of international standards and best practices as well
                         as to improve interoperability, in order to enable quality data aggregation and linkage. The
                         HDH is actively looking to encourage cross-border research collaborations on health data,
                         primarily with research structures and data controllers.



User fees                In the future, the HDH could charge fees for access to its services such as the use of the secure
                         project space for for-profit actors. As the Hub is in its start-up phases the exact rates are still
                         under development.



Pseudony-misation/       The HDH only stores pseudonymised data and citizens have a right to opt out of the secondary
anonymisation            use of their health data through the HDH. Citizens cannot object to uses made compulsory by
                         law, or necessary to carry out a mission of public interest, for example for health monitoring
                         purposes.

* Sources of information: health-data-hub.fr, legal technical survey by national country correspondent, and
correspondence with relevant experts.




                        Research Data Centre at the BfArM (Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical
                        Devices), Germany
Description
                        The Centre serves as a research data hub for claims data of all statutory insured people
                        in Germany (currently covering approx. 90% of the German population). It is currently
                        being reorganised, expanding its range of data and services. Within the next few years it
                        will also serve as a research hub for EHR data for which patients have granted access to
                        for research purposes.
Background
                        The Centre was originally based at the German Institute for Medical Documentation and
                        Information (DIMDI), responsible for medical information classification and
                        management. To strengthen its role, the institute was brought together with the Federal
                        Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices (BfArM) in May, 2020 to form one authority.
Legislation
                        The main legislation describing the mandate of the Research Data Centre at BfArM are
                        the §§303a-f of the Social Code Book 5 (Sozialgesetzbuch, SGB V, Statutory Health
                       Insurance; https://www.sozialgesetzbuch-sgb.de/sgbv/303a.html). It has been updated
                       with the Digital Care Act in December 2019 to accommodate the new role, and the
                       Patient Data Protection Act in July 2020 to, as of 2023, also include EHR data on a
                       voluntary basis. Based on the new §§303a-f of the Social Code Book 5 the Data
                       Transparency Ordinance (DaTraV) (http://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/datrav_2020/)
                       was revised in 2020. It describes the tasks of the Research Data Centre at BfArM in
                       more detail.
Tasks and activities
                       As described in § 303d SGB V the Research Data Centre is tasked to handle data that is
                       transmitted to it by the German Federal Association of Health Insurance Funds (GKV-
                       SV) and to promote the scientific secondary use of the data for specified research and
                       public health purposes. It, among others, includes carrying out quality assurance of the
                       data, examining requests for data use and making it available to authorised users while
                       balancing re-identification risks and intended scientific benefits. As separate entity, the
                       Robert Koch Institute (RKI) performs the duties of a trust agent managing a two-layered
                       pseudonymisation process to ensure that the pseudonymised claims data provided by the
                       GKV-SV are correctly linked to the longitudinal data at the Research Data Centre. The
                       data used for assigning the respective cross-period insured person pseudonyms to the
                       transmission work numbers are deleted; only the algorithms are kept.
Governance
                       The legal supervision of both the Research Data Centre and the trusted agent has been
                       assigned to the Federal Ministry of Health (BMG), but each maintain an operational
                       independence.
Organisation
                       The Research Data Centre is based at the Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical
                       Devices (BfArM) with an independent IT infrastructure. A dedicated trust agent unit is
                       based at the Robert Koch Institute (RKI). The statutory health insurance companies
                       reimburse the Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices and the Robert Koch
                       Institute for the costs of performing the task of data transparency.
Staff and functions
                       The staff of the Data Research Centre is currently being extended to accommodate the
                       new duties. Within the next few years it is expected that the staff will expand to about
                       15 full time staff members comprised mostly of IT specialists, data engineers and data
                       scientists.
Data sources and
                       As defined in the DaTraV, the research centre receives pseudonymised claims data from
types of data
                       the statutory health insurance companies for each calendar year (reporting year) per
                       statutory insured person (covering approx. 90% of the German population). It will
                       include among others diagnoses, prescriptions and treatment data from medical care,
                       including in- and outpatient care, dentistry, aids and remedies.
Data users             As defined in § 303e SGB V a pre-defined list of authorised institutions can request
                       permission to access data, and no further distinction is made between applicants. These
                       for example include health reporting institutions at the federal and state levels, health
                       insurance providers, relevant umbrella organisations of service providers or patients at
                       federal level, and universities as well as university hospitals recognized under state law.
                       This also includes publicly funded non-university research institutions and other
                       independent research institutions, provided the data serves independent scientific
                       projects. Commercial research institutes and industrial companies can thus not request
                       permission for data access. Authorized users may work together with third parties and
                       transfer query results, i.e. anonymised and aggregated data received from the Research
                       Data Centre, to further project partners only with prior permission of the Research Data
                       Centre. This will facilitate research collaboration undertaken between the public and the
                       private sector.
Foreign data users     § 303e SGB V does not explicitly list researchers or institutions from other Member
                       States as authorised users, but also does not restrict research institutes to domestic
                       institutions. In principle these can also be based in other Member States, as long as the
                       data are used for scientific research, and applicable law is respected.
User fees
                         User fees are defined in the Data Transparency Fee Ordinance (DaTraGebV;
                         http://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/datragebv/). Underlying principle is that the fees are
                         determined based on the amount and complexity of the data rather than the time spent on
                         the applications.
                         The fee for standardized data queries amounts to 300 euros. To provide data by means
                         of a query pre-formulated by the authorized user, the fee amounts to an additional 300
                         euros per evaluated year. In addition, a fee of 50 to 1,600 euros will be charged for each
                         consultation, each preparation of preliminary evaluations and for interim results
                         depending on the scope and complexity of the request and the associated use of
                         personnel and material benefits. For the provision of pseudonymised individual data
                         records in future secure, physical or virtual surroundings of the centre, an additional fee
                         of 100 to 3,000 euros is charged, again depending on the scope and complexity of the
                         request and the associated use of personnel and material services calculated.
Data altruism
                         Currently, data include claims data of all statutory insured citizens without requiring
                         their permission. As part of the "Patient Data Protection Act" (Patientendaten-Schutz-
                         Gesetz, PDSG) in 2020, patients can voluntarily make use of an electronic patient record
                         (elektronische Patientenakte, ePA). From 2023 onwards, insured persons will have the
                         option of voluntarily making the data stored in the ePA available to research via the
                         Research Data Centre (source: BMG 2020)63. This has also been adjusted in § 363 IV
                         SGB V: Insured persons can voluntarily release the data in their ePA for the research
                         purposes listed in § 303e II Nos. 2, 4, 5 and 7 SGB V to the Research Data Centre.
                         Insured persons may also make the data in their ePA available for a specific research
                         project or for specific areas of scientific research on the sole basis of informed consent.
Pseudony-misation/       The Research Data Centre shall provide authorised users with data that is anonymised
anonymisation            and aggregated to the extent required for the specific research question.
* Sources of information: legal technical survey by national country consultant, legal texts as mentioned in
the box and correspondence with relevant experts.

                         Statistics Netherlands (CBS)
Description
                         Statistics Netherlands (CBS) is the independent national statistics agency, providing
                         statistical information on social issues, including health. Within CBS, the microdata
                         services department was set up to allow researchers to obtain health and other data for
                         research purposes.
Background
                         CBS is the central agency to access data for research and other types of secondary use of
                         health and administrative data. However, access to health data is very fragmented in the
                         Netherlands and there are also many other access points (e.g. regional biobanks). CBS
                         was established in 1899 in response to the need for reliable and independent statistical
                         information on social issues. The CBS statistics should support the public debate and
                         policy-making and reduce social inequality by collecting, processing and publishing
                         statistical data. CBS microdata services provides access to (linked) data for third parties
                         for research purposes.


Legislation
                         The Statistics Netherlands Act forms the legal basis for CBS and precludes that any data
                         recorded and collected in the Netherlands with public funding, may be used by CBS for
                         their statistical tasks. Permission is needed from some of the data sources for secondary




63
     https://www.bundesgesundheitsministerium.de/patientendaten-schutz-gesetz.html
                        use by other parties.

                        CBS is an autonomous administrative authority which is financed by the state. Standard
Organisation and
                        fees apply for anyone using the data. Fees are based on the number of datasets to be
budget
                        linked, a monthly access fee for each user, and the size of the dataset.
Data sources
                        The Healthcare Market Regulation Act requires health care providers to submit
                        pseudonymised data about treatment codes to the Healthcare Authority (HCA). The
                        HCA further processes the data and sends statistics to the Department of Health and
                        CBS. Only treatment codes which are based on a fee for service (instead of a lump sum
                        based on the number of enrolled patients) are sent regularly to the HCA. Health care
                        providers are also obliged to submit pseudonymised data about treatments etc. to CBS.
                        However, this obligation is balanced against the administrative burden of submitting
                        data. If CBS can derive sufficient information from a representative sample of health
                        care providers, it will not require all similar health care providers to provide data.
                        Types of data that can be accessed through CBS are: electronic health records, both from
                        primary care and hospitals, social care data, long-term care data, health insurance claims
                        data, prescribing and dispensation records, disease registries, health data linked with
                        social and environmental data. Such data can be from private or public sources.
                        For some sources of data, separate permission has to be obtained from data sources (e.g.
                        extracts from hospital and primary care electronic health records, claims data from
                        health insurers). For other data sources permission from CBS suffices (e.g.
                        socioeconomic data).
Data users
                        Authorised institutes can use microdata sets of CBS for research purposes, which consist
                        of linkable data sets at individual level. Authorised organisations are Dutch universities,
                        scientific research institutes, policy advice and analysis organisations, statistical
                        authorities from European Member States, and other institutions that have been granted
                        access through an application form.
                        In order to work with the data, the following conditions must be met: a) The primary
                        mission of the institution (or the relevant part thereof) is to conduct statistical or
                        scientific research, b) results of the research will be published, and c) the institution has
                        a good name and reputation.
Foreign processors
                        Foreign institutions can apply for access and should preferably have working relations
                        with a Dutch authorised institution.
Data fees
                        The fees which apply to microdata research depend on the number of participating
                        researchers, the number of dataset subjects and the duration of the project, among
                        others.
                        Services during the project start-up consist of a basis starting up cost of 1,800 EUR and
                        an additional fee of 180 EUR per dataset topic. Importing one’s own data will depend on
                        the level of encryption, from simple (250 EUR) to complicated (1,300 EUR).
                        Services during an ongoing research project are in part variable, depending on the data
                        set topics (18 EUR support costs per topic) and output checking (220 EUR per output).
Pseudony-misation/
                        Pseudonymised data is accessible in a secure remote environment with a personal token.
anonymisation
                        The researcher can link CBS data with other datasets upon request. Only statistical
                        output can be exported, and CBS checks whether results imply a risk of re-identification.
* Sources of information: cbs.nl, legal technical survey, knowledge of the authors


                     BIGAN Health Research Infrastructure, Aragón, Spain
Description          BIGAN integrates a technological infrastructure and a data lake gathering individual
                     population and patient data from the regional health service and health related information
               systems from Aragón. Specifically, for research, BIGAN has put together healthcare data
               from 1.3 million lives – Aragón population, more than 800 million records in a data lake of
               pseudonymised patient data and renders it accessible to the scientific community as a one-
               stop shop service.
               The holistic approach gathering not only health data but also health related data (social,
               environmental, geographical) provides cross-fertilisation from various research areas which
               in turn might provide insight to future research policies.
Background     First mention of the ideas supporting the project BIGAN was introduced within the policy
               agenda through the Plan “Aragón Health-2030”. This plan included a regional strategy for
               the common exploitation of all the health and health related information systems in Aragón
               with big data and AI tools; thus, harnessing the potential of the reuse of real-world (big)
               data (RWD) in Aragón for population health research.
Legislation    BIGAN was created as a new subsystem within the existing health information system in
               Aragón. Executive order (SAN/1355/2018) established the Aragón Regional Health
               Authority BIGAN platform. BIGAN platform is a data infrastructure implemented to reuse
               any kind of existing data for planning, quality management and health research. As an
               element of the health information system in Aragón, BIGAN platform is governed by the
               Health Law of Aragón (Law 6/2002), the Decree on social and healthcare information
               system (Decree 164/2000) and the Law on Research and Innovation in Aragón (Law
               17/2018). Furthermore, BIGAN research complies with Law 41/2002 Governing Patient
               Autonomy and Law 14/2007, on biomedical research, and with national and European data
               protection legislation.
Tasks and      BIGAN overcomes research fragmentation and duplication by integrating health and health
activities     related data from the Aragón region into a single centrally managed infrastructure based on
               the modular design of the BIGAN platform that allows for increasing numbers of data
               sources to be integrated.
               BIGAN offers different portals according to its goals and required functionalities: Planning
               and Quality Management, Research, and Training. They are being deployed at different
               timespans. BIGAN Planning and Quality Management services started off in 2019, while
               BIGAN research and BIGAN training services are scheduled to be fully operational in 2021.
               From inception (2017) to full operation and evaluation (expected 2022), the deployment
               project has a forecasted duration of 5 years.
Governance     BIGAN is led by the Health Sciences Institute in Aragón (IACS). IACS was created by the
               Regional Health Law (6/2002), and is a public independent entity within the Health System
               in Aragón responsible for overseeing, promoting and managing biomedical research and
               innovation and producing evidence-based guidance on health technology, health policy
               assessment, and medical practice guidelines.
               BIGAN Oversight Committee controls and follows up BIGAN development according to its
               goals while IACS is in charge of the day-to-day operations. The Ethics Committee for
               Research in Aragón (CEICA) is responsible for ensuring the correct application of the
               methodological, ethical and legal principles in BIGAN activities including the assessment
               of the implications for individual and civil rights, distributive justice, health and safety and
               quality of life.
               In BIGAN, patients are able to view and change their data opt-out choice at any time (and
               without any justification needed).
Organisation   BIGAN data controllers are the Aragón Regional Health Authority (Department of Health)
and budget     and the Aragón Health Service (SALUD). Contracts between controllers and processors are
               in place, the last of them signed in February 2020.
               BIGAN infrastructure has an available budget of 1.06 million EUR for the period 2018-
               2020 divided in 3 categories (HHRR, IT and Subcontracting), HHRR being around 90% of
               the overall budget.
Staff and      The IACS Biocomputing unit (four members) is responsible for the design, operational
functions      management, development and maintenance of BIGAN infrastructure with the support of
               IACS staff on the IT, Legal, Ethical, and HHRR departments and with the assistance of
                    researchers from the Health Services and Policy Research group.
Data sources        BIGAN research infrastructure data lake gathers individual level data from all the
and types of        population registered as beneficiaries of the Aragón Health System (virtually 100% of the
data                population) and the regional health service information systems, including primary care,
                    specialised care, hospitalisations, ER episodes, drug prescription, drug reimbursement,
                    image diagnosis, laboratory analytical determinations, diagnostics, vaccination, anamnesis
                    and demographics. Data from these sources are updated according to their specific
                    generation dynamics, in most cases daily.
Data users          According to the Protocol approved by the BIGAN Oversight Committee (December 2019),
                    within the context of a research project, the pseudonymised data is accessible, directly to
                    researchers within the “R&D Aragonese system” (as defined by regional law 17/2018); and
                    indirectly accessible by other researchers (either public or private), when an agent of the
                    R&D Aragonese system actively participates.
                    Accessing BIGAN health research infrastructure includes a transparent approval process for
                    health research projects which favours trust and accountability and fosters public-private
                    partnerships and collaboration between public and private researchers, always under the
                    assumption of the societal benefit of this collaboration.
Foreign data        Favouring a seamless health data exchange in the European Research Area is an important
users               objective of BIGAN research infrastructure and multi-country projects funded by national
                    or European institutions are able to access to BIGAN research platform.
                    Within the context of cross-border research projects, pseudonymised data is accessible by
                    researchers (either public or private), when an agent of the R&D Aragonese system actively
                    participates in the project. Non-R&D Aragonese agents can have granted direct access to the
                    data although it requires a specific access by the BIGAN Oversight Committee in the light
                    of the criteria of relevance, security and social interest.
User fees           Basically the fees are composed of four categories, namely data extraction and data
                    processing; computing; basic storage; advance storage, as follows:
                    1. Data extraction and data processing: 37.72 / 31.43* / 13.16** EUR/hour
                    2. Computing: 0.12 / 0.10* / 0.08** EUR/ hour /CPU
                    3. Basic storage: 0.93 EUR/year/GB
                    4. Advance storage: 2.67 EUR/year/GB


                    * Reduced fee 1: applied to research projects managed by public research bodies or other
                    public organisations.
                    ** Reduced fee 2: applied to research projects managed by IACS, University of Zaragoza or
                    the IIS Aragon Foundation


                    Please notice that BIGAN research and training services are scheduled to be fully
                    operational in 2021.
Pseudony-           The BIGAN data lake contains already externally pseudonymised data only. Re-
misation /anony-    identification of data at origin may take place only when, in the course of a research using
misation            pseudonymised data, it becomes apparent that there is a real and specific danger to the
                    safety or health of a person or a specific group of people, or a serious threat to their rights,
                    or that it is necessary to ensure proper health care.
* Sources of information: correspondence with relevant experts.



                    Danish health data governance landscape
Introduction
                    Denmark is a digitalised and data-intensive country and promotes actively data based
                    research. As Denmark has a very rich and diverse health data governance landscape, this
                    box outlines the main national infrastructural access points.
                In Denmark there is a difference between clinical access points and research access points.
                Sundhed.dk is the access point to EHRs for patients and also for health professionals for
                clinical purposes. A stakeholder needing data for research has several access points, and can
                go to the Danish Clinical Quality Program (RKKP) for quality databases, the Serum
                Institute for health data, and to Statistics Denmark for registry data combined across sectors.
Clinical care
                Primary care data must be accessed through the municipalities (for homecare and nursing
data
                homes) and DAK-E/KIAP from the Danish Quality Unit for General Practice for GP-data.
                Sundhed.dk is an independent agency governed by the Regions and the Government and
                contains the national EHR. At the sundhed.dk platform patients can access personal health
                information from EHR, laboratories, personal choices (e.g. organ donor), and the national
                patient registry. The patients can access their record, but they cannot report data or control
                the data. Health professionals also have access to the EHR.

Registry data   The two main national data governance bodies that host health data are: Statistics
                Denmark, storing data about the wider Danish population, and the Danish Health Data
                Authority (Sundhedsdatastyrelsen), hosting disease registers and data bases with health
                related information.
                Statistics Denmark is a public independent agency and holds copies of register data and can
                extract health data and combine it with social conditions when the researcher requests it.
                Researchers can apply for access to data locally with data custodians, or for the whole
                country through the Researcher Service (Forsker-service) at Serum Institute (when it is
                health data only) and through Statistics Denmark, if the researcher wants to combine health
                data with other data types.
                The Danish Health Data Authority holds all health registers, and provides research support
                service (Forskerservice) for researchers who wish to access health data. It is also responsible
                for national coordination of data exchange systems and infrastructures for the provision of
                healthcare.
                The Danish Clinical Quality Program (RKKP) is the cross-regional network organisation of
                the five Danish regions that constitutes the infrastructure of clinical quality registries and
                coordinates access to the data for researchers. The decision regarding access is made by the
                steering group of the individual data base.
                There is a fee for accessing data for research that must be paid to Statistics Denmark, the
                Serum Institute, or DAK-E but that only covers the hours spent on setting up the specific
                data set, and for DAK-E also the commercial vendor fee. It is not the cost of the
                infrastructure.
                Registry data are available for research with no informed consent (“solidarity by law”).
Biobank data
                The National Biobank, hosted by the Staten Serum Institute, and the Regional Biobank
                Program provide access to tissue samples. The National Genome Centre provides access to
                genomic data. The Health Act specifies that all genomic data from comprehensive genetic
                analyses is stored in a national genomic database and that patients have the right to opt-out
                of further use of the data.
Data exchange
                All data is exchanged via the platform Sundheddatanettet. Data are not stored there but it is
                a secure space where you need authentication and approval to be linked up through VPN-
                access so that you can exchange data. MedCom is responsible for developing and setting
                standards for data exchange and testing supplier products before they are released to ensure
                data compatibility.
Data altruism
                In Denmark Sundhed.dk mentions in their strategy for the coming two years that they wish
                to open up safe spaces for storage of citizen generated data, and potentially they can be
                marked as available for research too, but this is not operating yet.
Access by
                Statistics Denmark has been involved in several working groups to facilitate data exchange
foreign              between different countries.
researchers
                     Data from Statistics Denmark is as a main rule only available for Danish researchers, but
                     foreign researchers can get access to micro data through an affiliation to a Danish authorised
                     environment. The Danish Health Data Authority applies the same rules.
User fees
                     There is a fee for accessing data for research that one has to pay to Statistics Denmark, the
                     Danish Health Data Authority, the Serum Institute, or DAK-E (for GP data) but that only
                     covers the hours spent on setting up the specific data set, and for DAK-E also the
                     commercial vendor fee. It is not the cost of the infrastructure.
                     While the exact situation is difficult to assess, a direct consultation with Statistics Denmark
                     about calculation of prices does not suggest differentiated prices. However, public entities
                     rarely pay for data access; they use the data they already have in-house, and do not order
                     data sets through research service portals.
Pseudony-
                     All public agencies store data of citizens using the patient’s ID number (PIN) and they can
misation /anony-
                     be linked at Statistics Denmark. They also link data from different sectors. Data held in the
misation
                     data access infrastructures are marked with a pseudonym of the patient’s ID number (PIN).
* Sources of information: legal technical survey by national country correspondent, correspondence with relevant
    experts, van der Wel et al. (2019), respective organisation websites. More details on centralized bodies, in chapter
    7 of the study: European Commission (2020). Assessment of the EU Member States rules on health data in the light of GDPR.
     https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/health/files/ehealth/docs/ms_rules_health-data_en.pdf      (Annexes   available    at:
     https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/default/files/ehealth/docs/ms_rules_health-data_annex_en.pdf).
